<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Some Gossip About Chapelizod</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="some-gossip-about-chapelizod" epub:type="se:short-story">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Some Gossip About Chapelizod</h2>
			<p>Ghosts in Chapelizod, my good sir! "Why who knows not so?" A place that is itself a shadow of things past, the living spectre of old times. Chapelizod is all a ghost. If any one desires to see a suburban village of the once proud city of Dublin reduced to a marrowless skeleton, without a single speculation in its eye by which it can ever hope to rise again, let him go to Chapelizod. Dead walls; dead trees overhanging them; dead lights instead of windows in the houses; the men grave, the women lifeless, the little spirits squeaking and gibbering in the muddy streets! A veritable <i>caput mortuum</i> is Chapelizod. No wonder that Bob Martin should fancy he saw a ghost, for he was always looking at one.</p>
			<p>It is just fifty years since Chapelizod was marked for the silent tomb, and condemned to perish by a lingering death. The cold hand of Centralisation, long before the insatiable monster was known by that name, clutched its first victim in Chapelizod. I barely remember the event. A heavy storm came down from the west; great rains had previously descended, and the angry spirit of the river screeched. I heard it myself running under the skew arch of the old bridge. There was lightning in the sky, and the clouds flew across the face of the moon like mad things. As yet the air was calm on the surface of the earth, but towards midnight the gale arose and tore up a number of trees in the Park. Before twenty-four hours we all perceived how easy it would have been to foresee what was coming, for in the course of the forenoon the order arrived for disbanding the <i>Royal Irish Artillery</i>. It was now no longer a mystery why it had <i>blown great guns</i> all the night.</p>
			<p>That was the first special act of centralisation--always excepting the fatal centripetal movement from the house in College-green--which was perpetrated against Ireland. The glory of our national service was then extinguished, and Woolwich was made the arsenal sole of the United Kingdom. The royal regiment was broken up, its guns transferred to <i>Sarah Bridge</i>, its veterans drafted--as many of them as thought proper to merge their name in an undistinguished throng--into the general service, and not a few who had grown old in the troop found an asylum in the Royal Hospital at Kilmainham.</p>
			<p>The transition of an old soldier from Chapelizod to Kilmainham was easy, the principal change consisting in putting off a blue coat to put on a red. They were not required to seek unaccustomed seats, or new associations among strangers, in whom the very accents of their tongue would awaken a prejudice against them, and make them objects of vulgar derision; but they dropped gently down the vale of years, amongst their own countrymen, near scenes hallowed to memory, still looking upon those hills which had exhilarated their hearts in the pride and prime of life, and inhaling breezes, wafted down the stream, which had braced and invigorated their lusty sinews, when they were "strong swimmers." They had friends and kindred at the old quarter, whom they continued to visit on festive occasions, "at the season of the year;" and it was pleasant to see the hearty old fellows, in their new "coats of scarlet," on the king's birth-day or a Whitsun-Monday, mixing with the crowd of villagers; one leading a little grandson by the hand, another engaged in cheering converse with a married daughter, or linked with some civil <i>remanet</i> of the bygone century, with whom, peradventure, he had quaffed many a social cup of ale; and all climbing the green slope that overhangs the Liffey, on their way to the grand review.</p>
			<p>By degrees, as years rolled on, the bright red spots in that moving picture died out; but it was a consoling reflection to those who turned their thoughts to the evidence thus afforded of the sure and silent work of death, that the ties of life had not been abruptly or prematurely torn asunder by the cold hands of centralizing economy. They who had served their country faithfully and loyally in their youth, were suffered to live out their full time, solaced by those attentions and sympathies, dearer far than the charity of dry <i>rations</i>, which public gratitude, aiding and giving effect to royal bounty, ungrudgingly secured for them.</p>
			<p>But our new generation is wiser than to care for the feelings of men. The <i>heart</i> of this United Kingdom beats only and exclusively in the centre of its body; and thither all the life-blood of the land must flow. It may one day be found out, when pulsation refuses to answer at the extremities, that it is possible to overgorge the ventricles of that huge organ. At present, however, it is resolved to take in all," regardless alike of charters, of rights, of common sense, and of common humanity. The Royal Hospital at Kilmainham is doomed to extinction.</p>
			<p>It seems nothing that it was founded by royal charter, and by a rate levied upon the pay of soldiers serving in the army of Ireland, "to the end that such of the said army as have faithfully served their sovereign in the strength and vigour of their youth may, in the weakness and disaster that their old age, wounds, or other misfortunes may bring them into, find a comfortable retreat and a competent maintenance therein." It was endowed with lands, by an instrument which provides that "within the precincts of those lands shall be from henceforth, and shall <em>for ever</em> hereafter continue and be an hospital, in deed and name, for the receipt, abiding, and dwelling of such a number of poor, aged, maimed, and infirm soldiers, to be lodged, harboured, abide, and be relieved therein." The charter by which Trinity College holds its estates is not more sacred, nor the perpetual uses to which they must be applied more distinctly defined. Yet the Queen's government, upon its own mere motion and authority, has taken upon itself to root out this time-honoured foundation. The maimed and aged Irish soldier must henceforth find a" comfortable retreat" in Chelsea, where the voice of kinsman or friend will greet him no more. The sights and sounds, which bring back the days of youth with such a homefelt and soothing power to the memory of the aged, will be excluded from his eyes and ears, and he will die in cheerless exile, an unhappy and unthankful recipient of imperial alms.</p>
			<p>It was well for the survivors of our National Artillery, that the faith of royal charters, and the kindly feelings of human nature were respected in their days. They had the satisfaction to feel, to their latest moment, that they possessed a country, and that their country had no disposition to disown them; so their end was peace.</p>
			<p>Beside those who took service in the British army, or who retired for the remainder of their lives into the shelter provided for them in "the Hospital of King Charles the Second," there were many who, laying aside the military character, merged in the general body of society, and occupied themselves variously in civil employments, according to their natural leanings or abilities. Some few, who had adorned the old brigade in its palmy estate, disdained to quit the scene of its renown, but lingered about the ancient haunts till, one by one, they dropped into the grave. There was General Bettesworth, and his orderly man John Norton. The general inhabited a pretty place, now sadly dismantled, by the river side, and John was his gate-keeper. It was a sight to see them both stepping out for the parish church at Christmas, and the other high festivals, in the full uniform of their respective ranks, powdered, pomatum'd, and bequeued, as if they were sallying forth to be reviewed by Frederick William of Prussia. If Corporal Trim left a representative after him, it was John Norton stiff in opinion, erect in stature, simple and honest as a child, pious as a parson. His master had all the gentle parts of human nature blended with the same high courage which distinguished my Uncle Toby.</p>
			<p>Is it not strange how many people claim relation to "Uncle Toby ?" Nobody thinks of calling him Tristram Shandy's uncle. He is "my uncle,” your uncle, everybody's uncle. Sterne has managed to infuse that sweet touch into his nature, which makes the whole world kin to him, and proud to acknowledge it. But this by the bye.</p>
			<p>An anecdote may here be related which illustrates the character of those primitive soldiers, and of the discipline of the service at the close of the eighteenth century. It happened one morning that John Norton was late at parade, and, as men sometimes do when they are hurried, he had made a mistake in his equipments, having put on his cross-belts wrong.</p>
			<p>"Why, John Norton," said the general, "how is this? you have put on your belts the wrong way."</p>
			<p>The men began to laugh, and John's ire was kindled; but he was too proud to look at his right hand or his left, to examine into the truth of the case.</p>
			<p>"No, general," said he, "I have not."</p>
			<p>“Oh but, indeed, John, you have."</p>
			<p>"By all that's bad, general," said John, who had a trick of interlarding his discourse with this extraordinary invocation, "I have not."</p>
			<p>"Well, then," said the patient commander, "we'll try. Fall in, John Norton. Attention! Carry arms! Prime and load."</p>
			<p>All these manœuvres did John go through, like an automaton, until the last, when, laying his hand upon a bayonet where his cartouch-box ought to be, he exclaimed--</p>
			<p>"By all that's bad, general, you're right."</p>
			<p>According to the present strict rules of discipline in the British army a file of men would have been ordered to march so refractory a subject off to the guard-house; and if he were not tried by a regimental court-martial for insubordination, he might deem himself a fortunate individual. At all events, "good conduct" would never afterwards, should he continue in the service to the age of the Duke of Wellington, emblazon his discharge. But John Norton walked home beside the general's horse listening, with a meek and subdued spirit, to a friendly lecture upon the wisdom of sometimes supposing that others may be in the right as well as one's self.</p>
			<p>At the other side of the river, nearly opposite to General Bettesworth's, but close to the village, are two adjoining brick houses, somewhat removed from the road. In one of these lived and died General Stratton. The other was occupied by Major Legge. The general was a venerable Ligonier-like man, and his wife a stately matron of the olden time, whom I seem to see this moment, with her stomacher and brocaded dress, and a long narrow scarf trimmed with the richest lace; her grey locks turned up, like flax round a distaff, over her forehead, and a towering bonnet of black silk over all. She was deemed a proud woman, but very good to the poor. As to her pride, I have heard no proof of it, except that she kept the village gossips at bay; but the reputation of her goodness is incontestable.</p>
			<p>An <i>Emeritu</i>s of a lower grade, but more formidable than the whole <i>Etat Major</i> to the juvenile imagination, was William Oulton Prosser, who from the post of a bombardier had retired to Ballyfermot Castle, where he opened an "academy" of liberal instruction. I still quail to remember him. It was only the other day that his name, written in round-hand across the title-page of a "Trusler's Chronology," purchased at Sharpe's auction-room, sent a thrill through me, as if it had been the wind of a round shot. He was a tall, stern-looking pedagogue, who never came down from his bedroom before eleven o'clock in the forenoon; and then he despatched a dirty servant-boy into the schoolroom, which was detached from the castle, to summon the boys on the black list to come in and be whipped. That operation he performed as if he had served in no other rank than that of a drummer all the days of his "sogering" upon earth; and it was administered in the breakfast parlour amid the <i>debris</i> of the repast (bread and butter and egg-shells), which the giant had just demolished to give him strength for the task. It had been his wont to inflict condign discipline in the midst of the school; but it happened on a day, that a boy, whose name was included in the usher's report, lay in ambush behind a heap of coats, in the porch; and as the ogre passed through, flourishing the formidable taws, and "chewing vengeance all the way," the poor wretch, in a frenzy of terror and despair, flew upon him, as a cat driven wild by persecution, and bit a large piece out of the calf of his leg. The big tyrant limped away into his den, and swore upon the family Bible that he would never again set foot in the said schoolroom, and that he would whip the said boy. He kept both the oaths, "in a sort of way," being obliged to compromise the matter with the delinquent, who agreed to save his Christian master's conscience, only on condition that the word of promise should be broken to the <i>hope</i>. A shadowy castigation, therefore (the ghost of a whipping), was submitted but from that hour the main business of the academy was carried on by deputies, remote from the eye of the master. He still continued, however, to perform the part of an high justiciary, and to take cognizance of copy-books and arithmetical exercises, which the boys were required to exhibit to him in procession.</p>
			<p>The remainder of his day was occupied principally in attending to the refrigerating process of some gallon of boiled water, in a huge white jug, which he filled every morning at the breakfast-table, and set upon the stone outside the window to cool. After dinner, this supply was placed on the table by his right hand, and corrected, <i>pro re natâ</i>, with whiskey, until, tumbler after tumbler, the whole of its contents disappeared. That was his stint; he never exceeded it; but as soon as it was finished, which was rarely before two or three o'clock next morning, he went to bed; and it depended on the quality of the spirit thus imbibed (the quantity being uniformly the same) in what degree of ill-humour he should apply himself to his professional duties of the following noon.</p>
			<p>Such was the schoolmaster of one of the fashionable boarding-schools in the immediate vicinity of our capital some fifty years since. It was my fortune to be removed from under his <i>ferula</i> to that of another who had been an operative tailor--not an Alton Locke, though--and whose ignorance of everything but handwriting and Gough's Arithmetic, was far more astounding than that of the bombardier. He made up, however, in morality, for his shortcomings in erudition; and as they both kept tolerably competent ushers, and had an understanding of mutual profit with the bookseller, care was taken that their pupils should be supplied with a competent stock of tools for learning at all events; so we hobbled through the Latin and Greek course, <i>utcunque</i>, and Trinity College made the most of us afterwards.</p>
			<p>If ever your ghost-seer extends his nocturnal saunterings towards Ballyfermot, about "the wee sma' hours ayont the twal," let him have an eye out for a large white jug with a red nightcap and a pair of green goggles; for as surely as drunken spirits are permitted to revisit the glimpses of the moon, in that place and at such an hour will the schoolmaster be abroad.</p>
			<p>Upon the dispersion of our own royal regiment, the Macleod Fencibles took up their quarters in the barrack, which thereupon stank horribly of cockaleekie every morning. A raw, wild, breekless tribe they were, fresh caught from the Highlands, at a period when the Trossachs were as inaccessible to the foot of civilised man as the Kyber Pass. The chief of the clan had collected and regimented them, selecting his own officers from the sons of his tacksmen and reivers, and few members of the mess could speak a dozen consecutive words of good English. The colonel, a fiery old Gael, and "vengeance proud," did his best to <i>lick</i> them into form, using his knuckles occasionally, it was said, for that purpose; and, indeed, a vigorous discipline was needful. They wrangled at dinner for the choice morsels of the various joints, three or four knives and forks being sometimes plunged at the same moment into one leg of mutton; and upon a certain occasion, when a large turbot was served, those who sate near the would-be carver saved him the trouble of apportioning it, by forking it away upon their own plates with their long bony fingers. This vexed the colonel exceedingly; for there were strangers at the table who had never dined at a Fencible mess before. For a whole week, therefore, he condemned them to leek-porridge, which was <i>eaten</i> with a spoon, while all the regimental pipers, seated (<i>more Scotico</i>) at the end of the apartment, blew "<i>Cauld Kail</i>," and other appetizing <i>refreins</i>, to bring them to an improving sense of the privations they were enduring. Many of those caterans were afterwards drafted into the general service, and attained the highest honours awarded to good soldiership. These, indeed, came to them by nature; but the acquisition of the manners of gentlemen was not so easy; yet more than one of the individuals, who scrambled on that memorable occasion for the turbot, have been deemed worthy to sit down at royal banquets, and were justly classed amongst the flower of North British chivalry.</p>
			<p>The Carlow militia came next, a polite corps, but numbering some strange twists among its subalterns. The adjutant, one Clifford, had been raised from the ranks by the favour and discernment of Colonel Latouche. He was a humorous fellow, of a manly, independent mind, and scorned to hang his head at the remembrance of his origin. The General of Division, dining at the mess on the occasion of a quarterly inspection, complimented Clifford upon the excellent state of drill in which he found the regiment, and, alluding to his name, asked "if he had any relations on the staff?"</p>
			<p>"No, General," he replied, "but I have a great number on the spade.”</p>
			<p>It happened, on some occasion, that he displeased his colonel, who, in a hasty moment, declared his regret at having raised him from the state in which he had found him.</p>
			<p>"Then, Colonel Latouche," said Clifford, "you are the first of your name that ever was sorry for doing a good action."</p>
			<p>It is scarcely necessary to say that so adroit and just a compliment replaced him at once in his good patron's favour.</p>
			<p>The pride of the old barrack was sorely tried afterwards, by various incursions of feather-beds which came in successively with the Wicklow, South Mayo, North Downshire, and Limerick regiments. Your shell-jacket dandies of this day would stare at the half-moon-shaped cocked hats, black leggings with innumerable small buttons, and draggle-tailed coats of their predecessors. But the hair-powder was worse than all. Can I ever forget Bob Gloster, of the <i>Garryowens</i>, on his return from the grand review one broiling <i>Fourth of June</i>, wiping away, with the sleeve of his new scarlet uniform, the streams of liquefied flour that meandered down his cheeks, and bewailing the day that he had "ever left the sweet <i>English Town</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-9" id="noteref-9" epub:type="noteref">9</a> where he might have been reared up to an imminent marchant, to be melted out of creation like an althar-candle." Bob volunteered, shortly afterwards, into <i>the Line</i>, and became well used to the "melting mood" in Spain, where he soon earned for himself a pair of spurs; and when he came home, after the peace of Paris, Major Gloster, quite a polished cavalier, with a fine military accent, I should have liked to see the man who would remind him of his early chances of <i>imminence</i> in the mercantile line. It was of such materials that heroes were manufactured; and I could enumerate at least a dozen "ragged colts" who left that old barrack, in the midst of scenes of riot and drunkenness incidental to the volunteering system, and turned out "bra' chargers" at Vittoria, or on the plain of Waterloo.</p>
			<p>But Chapelizod was not always a mere depot of Fencibles and militia. It was for a good while the head-quarters of the 92nd, or <i>Gordon Highlanders</i>, so truly described in Captain Grant's charming romance. They marched in, all brown and shrivelled by the sands of Egypt, though some years had passed since they had been there. A grave, orderly, religious body of men they were, who seemed always conscious that they were only here for a breathing time, and could not long be spared from the field of death. Their leader was Major Cameron, <i>the Fassifern</i>, who ended his career of glory at Waterloo. Authors who write "stories founded on facts" take a license to embellish their materials, and to exaggerate the moral as well as the physical attributes of the persons whom they introduce, according to the exigencies of the fable. But there is no exaggeration in Captain Grant's portrait of Cameron. It is a true representation of the man. His outward semblance and his frank and generous spirit, his nobility of mind and person, are painted with equal fidelity. To see that man in front of his regiment was a sight worthy of the olden time. John Kemble did not impart a more exalted notion of the figure of <i>Caius Marcius</i> as he rallied the Roman legions before <i>Corioli</i>, than Cameron's robust but stately form, the dignity of which was in no degree impaired by a slight and scarcely perceptible halt, the effect of a musket-shot in the knee which he had received in Egypt, gave the spectators of the men who had scattered England's chivalry at Bannockburn. If Walter Scott knew him, his picture of Fergus Mac Ivor, all perfect as it is, can scarcely claim the merit of originality.</p>
			<p>No regimental biographer has attempted a history of "The Army of Reserve." It is a theme worthy of the pen of <i>Lorrequer</i> (now that poor Maxwell is gone, there is none other capable of doing it justice), and the materials for constructing it are fading rapidly out of the memory of mankind; yet Chapelizod still remembers "<i>the Blackbelts</i>." Who that ever saw can forget them? It is scarcely worth being sixty, indeed, or thereabouts, to have seen them; but since that would be in any case, it is a pride and a joy to have enjoyed the vision; for</p>
			<blockquote>"Eye ne'er shall look upon their like again."</blockquote>
			<p>The <i>Blackbelts</i>, so called because those decorations of military equipment in which the song exults as</p>
			<blockquote>"Your belts of white leather,"</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">were polished off as glossy as the raven's down across the shoulders and breasts of this distinguished corps, were known at the Horse Guards as the Second Garrison Battalion. They were physically, as the Sixtieth Regiment in those days was in a moral sense, the sweepings of the service. Every soldier who was blind of an eye, lame of a leg, maimed in an arm, crooked in form, or diminutive in size, and yet considered able to carry arms in the service of his sovereign, was drafted into the "<i>Blackbelts</i>," and the officers were pretty nearly of a piece with the men. They reminded me of the little hairy men who came in swarms on board Sinbad's vessel and devoured everything, carnal and vegetable, they could stick their claws into. But they were a well-disciplined battalion, and efficient enough for the sort of duty they had to perform. Excellent shots too they were, every man of them. No rifle corps in any service could have surpassed them with the brown bess; a target was knocked to splinters by them in half-an-hour. They were specially employed, on this account, to escort deserters; for escape was not an uncommon thing while the corporal's guard were engaged in social chat along a dusty road. The prisoner would slip his wrist through the handcuff, bolt up a lane, and dodge his pursuers from hedge to hedge till he got clear off. But let a <i>Blackbelt</i> catch but a glimpse of his person emerging from a thicket or doubling round a corner, and he had him down as unerringly as O'Gorman Mahon would bag a woodcock.</p>
			<p>Two or three incidents of this kind occurred during the stay of the battalion in Chapelizod. One of the occasions was very remarkable. A deserter broke loose in a crowded street and fled amongst men and women, who threw themselves purposely in the way, in order to facilitate his escape. But this manœuvre did not save him. The corporal levelled his musket, waited coolly till the wretch glanced for a moment into a vacant space, and then shot him dead. The fame of the <i>Blackbelts</i>, as sharp-shooters, and the unrelenting sternness with which they acted on such occasions, soon made them the terror of the service, and their prisoners ceased to hope for safety in sudden flight.</p>
			<p>Before taking leave of the military reminiscences of Chapelizod, let me throw a Parthian glance upon the yeomanry corps commanded by Captain Wilcocks (the late Sir Richard), whose handsome and portly figure I still seem to behold, like a Colossus looking down upon the evolutions of his men. The vicar of the parish, a loyal man, who took a lively interest in the military. education of those heroes, offered a gold medal to be shot for, at a distance of a hundred yards, upon the Palmerston fair-green. It was a great occasion, and all the beauty and fashion of three villages adorned it with their presence. There stood the captain to see fair play and en. courage the nervous, while his permanent sergeant, Ned Bullard, was ready with a jeer and a joke at the service of every one that shot wide of the mark. The zealous parson, adumbrated by a <i>shovel</i> of such dimensions as we see not in these days of skimping economy, rode up and down the line exhorting the brave to fear nothing, but, remembering that the eyes of their country were upon them, to acquit them like men. Point blank was the practice on that memorable day. Had the target been a thing of life, it would have required to be of the feline species to have survived; for I have no doubt that at least nine out of the hundred bullets struck some part of its circumference. The victor was one Pierce Butler, a round, fat, oily son of Crispin, who had never discharged a bit of lead from a musket barrel before, and who approached his task as we may suppose King Agag to have approached the Prophet Samuel. With averted eye he raised the gun to his shoulder, pulled the trigger, in an agony of desperation, and falling back by the force of the rebound amongst his sympathizing fellow-soldiers, exclaimed, "Hould me up!" It was some time before he could collect his scattered senses sufficiently to comprehend the cheers which announced that he had pierced <i>the bull's eye</i>. But when the great fact was made perfectly plain to his understanding, it was wonderful how promptly his spirit rose with his fortune, and with what a fiercely modest alacrity he strutted forward to the place where the vicar's niece, a charming young lady of eighteen, stood ready to invest him with the trophy. And now let me tell you that the only ghost of that corps that walks this firm set earth is the individual Bob Martin, whom your ghost-seer has so prematurely sent to his account. Bob is still as much as ever he was, which is not saying a great deal for him, extant amongst "articulate men," and, according to his own somewhat indignant account, has "as little call to sperrits, maybe, as gintlemen that takes greater liberties wid them."</p>
			<p>But there was a Bob Martin once; the old Bob of all, who served the office of sexton when the population of Ireland scarcely amounted to three millions of interrable bodies. That man could have enwrinkled you all over with grave statistics. It was he that buried Luttrell, and saw the blue light flickering out of the coffin, when the first shovelful of black earth was cast upon it; and formidable were the stories which he related of the same Luttrell. Bob was for a long while "the oldest inhabitant," but, unlike that personage in general, he could remember many things; and he would tell them with a gusto, when engaged knee-deep, or deeper still, in his professional avocation. To him is the world indebted for a few fragments of <i>Satanic History</i>, collected from the transactions of "The Hellfire Club," every tittle of which he was prepared to verify before any tribunal.</p>
			<p>The building of "<i>The Devil's Mills</i>," on the Lower Road to Lucan, was one of those incontestable facts. They were built in one night, at the requisition of the redoubtable Luttrell, who being hard pressed to devise a task beyond the ability of the architect to perform (otherwise he could not get rid of his society, which began to be rather <i>ennuyant</i>), he commanded the mill to be erected. But that was no trouble. He looked out of the window, and saw it done.</p>
			<p>"Throw a weir and dam across the river." <i>Presto</i>, there it was!</p>
			<p>"Make me a rope of sand."</p>
			<p>"Ah, there you have me," said the old gentleman, "for the devil himself cannot do that;" and so he was quit for that time. The ruined mill at Woodlands, on the Liffey bank, still attests the reality of this wonder.</p>
			<p>Again, at an annual meeting of the club, at which whoever happened to be last in a certain saltatory movement of the whole assembly, became the lawful prey of the <i>grand master</i>, it was Luttrell's luck to be left behind. But his good genius did not forsake him.</p>
			<p>"What are your eyes for?" he cried, nothing daunted. "Take the fellow that is coming after me."</p>
			<p>The devil let go his prey and seized--<i>a shadow</i>; whence the remarkable fact, that, to the hour of his death, Luttrell never had a shadow. Bob Martin had seen him a dozen times, without a shadow. He could not swear, indeed, that the sun shone on such occasions; but of the material fact, that Luttrell belonged to the <i>ascii</i> of the earth, there could not be a possible doubt.</p>
			<p>On a third occasion, when immersed in study--it would be curious to know the name of the volume--the old one peeping over his shoulder, gave him a familiar tap, and said:--</p>
			<p>"Come down, and finish it at my fireside."</p>
			<p>"Stay," said Luttrell, whose ready wit was never at a “<i>nonplush</i>,” I have a codicil to add to my will. Give me a delay till this inch of candle is burned out."</p>
			<p>The request seemed so moderate, that it was granted without hesitation.</p>
			<p>"Upon your honour?"</p>
			<p>"As I'm a gentleman."</p>
			<p>"Then, perhaps, you'll have no objection to sit a short time in the dark?" So said, so done. He blew out the candle, locked it up in his desk, marked the sign of the cross over the key-hole, and requested his friend to ring the bell for fresh lights.</p>
			<p>Now, though Bob was a staunch Protestant, and held mutterings in as much contempt as Lord John Russell, he believed most firmly that nothing could have hindered the old gentleman from following that inch of candle into the desk, and annihilating it with one puff of his breath, if the sign of the cross had not been so timely interposed to bar him out.</p>
			<p>But Bob's conversation was rich in remembrances of better men. His father had been married by "the Dane," whereby he meant Dean Swift, and a considerable proportion of his store of traditionary anecdote was connected, more or less, with that great name; nor was he singular in that. All the old men of his time preserved a lively sense of the wit and patriotism of the eccentric Drapier. They could tell all that is written, and a great deal that is not written, illustrative of his peculiar humour. As for Bob, he was able to point out the particular spot on the Castleknock road, where he stopped his horse to bargain with a cow-boy for a secret whereby he was enabled to prognosticate the weather. The dean had passed by, lightly clad, in full confidence that the weather would continue fair.</p>
			<p>"Go back for your cloak, sir," said the urchin; "it will rain.”</p>
			<p>Without heeding the warning, he passed on; and in an hour's time was wet to the skin. He returned to the spot, and demanded how the boy could foresee the shower? The youngster required half-a-crown for the information, which having obtained after some chaffering, he said:-</p>
			<p>"You see that big stone, your reverence, in the middle of the field. Well, whenever you want to know if it is going to rain, come to that place, and if you find the bull scratching himself against that big stone, you may be sure of it."</p>
			<p>To that big stone many a chuckling sexagenarian could point, as a memento of "the Dane," whose memory the whole community loved and revered, having been outwitted for once by a poor country boy. It may stand there yet, for aught I can tell.</p>
			<p>It was surely something, when the peasantry of a whole district were accustomed to amuse one another with the sayings and doings of the greatest of the wits of Queen Anne. The schoolmaster may have done much for the world in the last half-century, but he certainly has not raised the minds or improved the taste of that class. There are very few Bob Martins, in whose mouths the names of Swift, and Sheridan, and Delany, and Archbishop Boulter are now as "familiar as household words."</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
