<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Spalatro</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article id="spalatro" epub:type="se:short-story">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Spalatro</h2>
				<p epub:type="subtitle">From the Notes of Fra Giacomo</p>
			</hgroup>
			<section id="spalatro-part-1" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Part</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
				</h3>
<p>The Spalatro, surnamed Barbone, of
whom we speak, was not the illustrious bandit of Napoleon's early
time, who assumed, or acquired, that
name, but the celebrated original,
who first bore it two centuries since.
This man was nobly born, lost his
parents early, squandered his fortune, and then "took to the road"
professionally. He speedily became
one of the most powerful, if not <em>the</em>
most powerful, of Italian robbers of
any age. His followers were so numerous, so well armed, and so hardy,
that none of the states cared unneces
sarily to meddle with him, but contented themselves with acting to the
best of their ability upon the defensive;
it is even said that <em>Venice</em> allowed this
desperado a secret stipend upon the
condition that her territories should
be exempted from his depredations :
however this may be, it is certain that
he made himself so universally dreaded,
that but for his singular rashness, he
might have lived in as much security,
and died in as much splendour, as ever
did an absolute prince. He was, however, foolish enough to visit the city
of St. Mark during the carnival, and
happening to quarrel with a party of
young fellows, he killed three of them,
but being overpowered by numbers,
was taken, and after a protracted examination before the state inquisition,
was executed between the pillars in the
piazetta, beside the Doge's palace.</p>

<p>In the hall of the great council, in
the ducal palace, whither, upon the
suppression of the republic, the famous library of St. Mark was transferred, the reader, should he happen
to visit it, will find at the right of the
great entrance, a series of huge tomes,
in which are bound up a heteroge
neous mass of manuscripts of all kinds—poems, chronicles, and church music.
Among them he will discover a voluminous collection, in the hand-writing
of one who calls himself "Fra Giacomo, the humblest of the servants of
God, and of the republic, and messenger of peace to the victims of justice." He appears for many years to
have acted as confessor to the state
prisoners of Venice, and jotted down,
in his own hand, abundant notes of the
secrets of which he thus became possessed.</p>

<p>On this day, writes brother Giacomo, I visited, for the fourth time,
the renowned and unhappy Spalatro.
He is the boldest criminal I ever
spoke with; there is not in him
the fear of death or the fear of God.
He will neither pray, nor confess, nor
have any of the rites of the church.
Yesterday as I talked with him in the
prison, he fell suddenly upon the floor
in a fit of epilepsy, to which it seems
he has been long subject. When he
was somewhat recovered I began to
argue with him on his hardened state
of wickedness, and asked him if he
never thought how he should fare in
the other world, were death to come
in one of these fearful seizures; to
which he answered readily and coolly,
that he knew well how he should fare,
and had no need to inquire; thereupon I talked to him long and seriously,
and he listened and answered with
more respect than heretofore: he told
me that he believed in the existence of
God, and in that of the devil, but that he
thought little about the Christian religion, having no interest in it. He
went on with much excitement, and
among other strange things he said—"Were I to tell you why I believe in
the great spirits I have named, you
would think me mad. I have seen
things, these eyes have seen them,
which my lips shall never tell. Were
I to speak them, you and all other men
would laugh at me, and you would pronounce the <strong>truth</strong>, because it is unlike
what you are in the habit of seeing
every day, an impossibility and a lie;
but of this be assured, that I know
better than any other man can what is
in store for me; as for your prayers,
and relics, and solemnities, I hold them
in mere contempt. You can alter no
man's condition. You and your fraternity of monks could more easily dislodge the island upon whose breast
this prison sits, than sway in the least
degree the immutable destiny of a human soul, or bring its future dwelling
one inch nearer to heaven, or farther
from hell—tush! I know more of these
matters than half your divines."</p>

<p>When I visited him to-day, this
most unfortunate and sinful man was
in extraordinary spirits, and full of
jests and levity. I was so disgusted
with this, that I was about to leave
the cell, when he requested me to stay,
at the same time apologising for his
thoughtlessness, and assuring me he
meant no offence. When he chooses
he can be very courteous and even
engaging. I staid with him for a long
time, and he has told me the story of
his life. Gracious God! such a story.
I feel like one just awaked from a
fearful dream. I cannot believe, and
yet I know not how to reject it. The
tale was told with groans, and tears,
and tremblings, and agonies of excitement. My mind is full of doubts and
fears. I have no more certainty, no
more <em>knowledge</em>, mystery and illusion
are above, and below, and around me.
May God sustain me else my mind will
be lost, irrevocably lost in the abyss of
horror. The narrative was as follows,
I give his own words as nearly as I
can:—</p>

<p>"My mother was a lady of high
birth, and of some fortune; she married, when a mere girl, a French nobleman, Count d'Orbois. This marriage
was in every way unfortunate. The
count was attached to the French
court, whither he took his lady, and
having been thus separated from her
friends, she was speedily made to feel
the dependence of her condition in the
bitter sense of conjugal indifference
and desertion. Under these ill auspices,
which my after life in no part belied,
I entered the world, and forty-eight
hours after my birth my father, who
had never set eyes upon me, having
gambled all night with ill success,
fought two duels in the morning, in
the second of which he was so unfortunate as to be run twice through the
body, and killed on the spot. My
mother returned to Rome with some
small wreck of property, and after two
years of widowhood, being a person of
singular beauty, agreeable and lively
manners, and of unexceptionable birth,
she was proposed for by the Marchese
Picardi, and accepted him. My earliest
recollections are associated with the
noble scenery of the Apennines, to the
eastward of Rome, and not far from
Celano. There in the grand old castle,
which has for ages belonged to the
Picardi family, I passed the early and
the only happy years of my existence.
Here, however, I lost my best and tenderest friend, the only one who ever
cared very much about me—my mother.
She died when I was about six years
of age, having had, by her second
marriage, two children—a son and a
daughter. My step-father, for he soon
made it plain that he was resolved to
be no more to me, was a man of a
naturally cold and somewhat stern
temper. He did not love me, and his
preference of the others, however
natural, galled and wounded me. I
resolved, so soon as I should have the
right to demand the small sum of
money which was my only inheritance,
to claim it, and depart for ever from
the castle. The feelings of pride and
mortification in which this resolution
had taken its rise, were far, however,
from being always present to my mind.
I loved my sister and my brother too—selfish though he was I loved him. I
do believe, good father, that I might
have been a worthy man, as men go,
were it not for a certain pride, which
rose into madness even under the show
of wrong or oppression, and a kind of
ardour and impetuosity which left no
room for rest or caution. Although,
as I have said, the Marquis Picardi
refused me any place in his affections,
he did not suffer me to want the advantages of such an education as
became a gentleman. Nor were my
instructions confined to the mere corporal accomplishments of fencing,
horsemanship, and the like; on the
contrary, the larger portion of my time
was devoted to intense and ardent
study. My instructor in all intellectual pursuits was an old monk, from
the neighbouring monastery of Carmelites; and as some strange adventures in my after life were connected
with this man, you will excuse me if I
describe him briefly. He was a man of
great age, his features were commanding and classic, his forehead was bold
and intellectual, and furrowed with the
lines of deep thought; the baldness of
age had supplanted the tonsure, a few
locks of snow-white hair, venerably
covered his temples, and a long and
singularly handsome beard of the same
pure white, fell upon his bosom. His
figure was rather tall, though slight, and
might once have been athletic, but
now it was bowed under the weight of
years. Clothed in the brown habit of
his order, it were hard to conceive a
more picturesque impersonation of
reverend age. One relic of departed
youth alone remained to this venerable
man, it was the fiery vivacity of an
eye, which seemed as though it had
never rested or grown dim—an eye
under whose glance the buried secrets
of the heart arose and showed themselves, which nothing could baffle or
escape. This man, brother Anthony,
as they called him in the monastery,
was, as I have said, my instructor, and
a more learned or subtle, but at the
same time a more <em>unchristian</em> one could
scarcely have been found. He had in
me an ardent and, I believe, by no
means an unapt pupil; but in dealing
his instructions he had a strange delight
in setting my mind to work upon subjects which I verily believe no human
mind could bear. The fearful themes
of time and eternity, and the Godhead
in its vastest attributes, were topics in
which he loved to engage the faculties
of my mind; and I, entangled in the
mazy subtleties of his reasoning, or
overwhelmed by the magnitude of conceptions after which my mind strained,
but which it had not scope or power
to comprehend, felt myself often confounded and appalled to a degree which
merged upon madness, in such moments
the old monk would forget his gravity,
and, leaning back in his chair, indulge
in an excess of merriment, which little
tended to compose my nerves; and
strange to say, though I again and again
resolved against conversing upon such
matters, yet the old man, whenever he
pleased, which was often enough,
led me to them, as if to make sport for
himself out of the perplexities and
terrors in which such discourse never
failed to involve me. He had, too, a
strange pleasure in unsettling all the
most established convictions of my mind,
and in thus plunging me into an abyss
of fearful uncertainty and scepticism
from which I have never quite escaped.
This kind of metaphysical conversation
he not unfrequently seasoned with indirect and artful ridicule of religion,
urging, too, in terms which scarcely
affected disguise, a philosophy of sensuality unparalleled even in the doctrines of Epicurus. He had, however,
in a remarkable degree, the Satanic
art of clothing vice in the fairest disguise; and being himself so old as to
have no individual interest, further
than the inculcation of abstract truth,
in the doctrines which he broached,
they found the easier access to my
mind. It is scarcely wonderful then,
if in the hands of such a teacher, so far
from acquiring any higher morality,
even my natural sense of right and
wrong became confused and blunted.
This old man, corrupt in heart and
powerful in understanding, acquired a
strong control over me. I had no affection for him—such a feeling toward him
were impossible; cold and full of
satire, his nature exhibited to the eye
of youth no one quality which was not
essentially repulsive; he had yet such
intellectual attributes as to fascinate
and command. There was, too, between the situation and the character
of the man, a strange and mysterious
inconsistency, which filled me with a
deep and indefinable interest. Than
his station, garb, and habits of life,
nothing could be more humble; than
his appearance, nothing more worn and
aged—yet there were ever breaking
from him, not the aspirations of ambition, but the reckless scoffings of conscious and established superiority, and
while all his feelings seemed to have
withered into the scorched and bitter
selfishness of age, his mental faculties were endued with preter-human
energy, and an activity nothing short
of stupendous—</p>

<hr/>

<p>"I was ascending the great stairs of
the castle, when methought I heard a
shriek. I paused, I listened, I <em>did</em>
hear a shriek, and another, and another,
in quick succession. It was my sister's
voice; I hurried towards her room.
Several passages I had to traverse on
the way; the screams were louder and
more rapid, I reached the door, it was
fast; I rushed against it and stood in
the chamber. Heavens! what did I
behold—my sister with hair dishevelled,
struggling, terrified, locked in the grasp
of the aged wretch, my instructor.</p>

<p>"You see this arm, good father, it
was then as lusty and as sinewy as
now; with all the force that frenzy
gave, I struck the old villain in the face.
I might as well have smitten a rock—he turned upon me like a beast at bay.
I heard steps in the passage—servants
were approaching, but before they
entered the chamber the old man grappled with me, and seizing me by the
throat,to my shame be it spoken, hurled
me with tremendous force senseless
upon the floor. When I came to myself
the old friar had made his escape, and
neither at the castle nor the monastery
was heard of more. After this affair
I remained at the castle but a year, at
the end of which I was enabled to
realize my old scheme of departure and
independence.</p>

<p>"Mounted upon a powerful grey
horse, whose speed and mettle I had
often tried—fully equipped and armed
for the road, and with some hundred
crowns in my pocket—the remainder
of my fortune, a small one enough,
being lodged to my credit at Rome—I
set forth from the old place which had
been my home from my earliest days,
to throw myself upon the chances of
the world. It was not in nature that
I should leave this place without keen
regrets. Here all my life had been
passed, and here were the only living
persons who cared for or knew of my
existence. As I rode slowly through
the wild wood, which far away skirted
the rising ground on which the castle
stood, I turned to take a last look of
the old building. The temper of our
minds clothes even things inanimate
with an accordant expression; and as
I gazed upon its old grey front, it
seemed to me that a familiar face
looked sadly and reproachfully upon
me. Every window and ivy-mantled
battlement and buttress—all the picturesque irregularities—each nook and
corner of the fine old pile, suggested
to my busy memory some affectionate
and pleasant remembrance, which
moved my heart that we should thus
part, and for a moment so softened
me, that I was tempted to reject the
long-cherished counsels of my pride,
and return to the quiet haunts where
I had been so happy. But my evil
genius triumphed: the struggle was a
short one, and I turned my back for
ever on the castle, with a heart whose
despondency, I might say desolation,
gave too true presage of my after life.
I put my horse to a rapid pace, and
had soon left the scenes of my childhood
far behind, and out of sight for ever.</p>

<p>"The evening fell before I had accomplished more than half the way
which separated the castle from the
village in whose <i>hostelrie</i> I proposed
to pass the night. The road was
broken and difficult of passage-in all
respects, except as it served to indicate
the direction of my route, rather an
obstruction to my progress than tendency to facilitate it. The scenery
through which I passed, grand and
beautiful at all times, began now to
assume that wild and fantastic character which the broad and spectral
lights and shadows of a cloudless moon
shed on all beneath it. The track
which I had for some time followed
with much difficulty, now led through
a deep and rugged gorge, whose sides,
precipitous and broken, were clothed
with a dark luxuriant copse. For
more than an hour I had neither seen
human form nor habitation; but now,
for the first time, I felt the depression
of solitude. The utter desertion and silence of the place, unbroken except by
the moaning of the night wind, filled
my mind with that vague, mysterious
dread which men attribute to superstition. My heart leaped within me as some
broad gray rock, like a sheeted phantom
in the hoar light of the moon, suddenly
revealed itself; or again, when my
excited fancy beheld, in the dark top
of some tall fir nodding in the night
breeze, a gigantic demon saluting me
with "mop and moe," or beckoning me
towards it with long fantastic arms.
Full of such fancies, which scare us
even while we laugh at them, I slowly
and painfully pursued my solitary way,
frequently scrambling through sloughs
and fragments of timber, which storms
had dislodged from among the overhanging rocks—often, too, obliged to
dismount and lead my horse among
chasms and difficulties where his instinct would scarcely have availed
him. The labours and anxieties of
my progress, were moreover enhanced
by very considerable doubts as to the
correctness of the path which I was
pursuing—doubts which the difficulty,
I might almost say the impracticability
of the road, very nearly reduced to
certainty. While thus struggling onward, my eye was caught by what appeared to be the figure of a horseman,
moving cautiously round an abrupt
and shadowy prominence, some four or
five hundred yards in advance of me.
As this figure slowly approached, I
had ample opportunity of scanning his
garb and equipments. He was mounted
upon a tall, dark-coloured horse, and
enveloped in a cloak. He wore, moreover, a broad-brimmed and high-crowned hat. Thus much I could
plainly distinguish, as the form of the
horseman moved between me and the
moonlight. As the distance between
us lessened, I cautiously laid my
hand upon the butt of one of my
holster pistols, resolved, if occasion
should render it prudent, to deal very
briefly with the cavalier in the cloak.
When he had approached within
about forty yards, or even less, he,
perceiving me, it would appear, for the
first time, suddenly reined in, and stood
in the centre of my path, in strong and
marked relief against the clear light of
the moon, motionless and dark, as if
horse and man were carved out of
black marble. Although I never could
accuse myself of much timidity in presence of a human antagonist, my situation was not by any means pleasant.
That I stood in the presence and within
almost certain range of one of those
bandits, of whose quick and deadly aim
many a marvellous tale was current,
I had little doubt; and yet my suspicions were not sufficiently confirmed
to warrant me in anticipating his assault by any <em>overt act</em> of self-defence.
It was clear that, if shots were to be
exchanged, he must have the advantage
of the first. With a keen and fixed
gaze, therefore, I watched every movement of his, prepared, on the appearance of any gesture indicating an appeal to carbine or pistol, instantly to
shoot him, if I could. The figure,
however, made no such gesture, but,
after a considerable pause, addressed
me in a rough, good-humoured voice—</p>

<p>"'Signor, you travel late, and on
a foul track. Santa Maria! you need
a stout heart. Whitherward do you
ride?'</p>

<p>"'To Vallechia, signor,' replied I.
'How far do you call it hence?'</p>

<p>"'To Vallechia!' repeated he of the
cloak, after a most unceremonious
burst of merriment: <em>from</em> Vallechia,
I should say. Why, your back hath
been turned upon the high road thither
for ten miles at the least.'</p>

<p>"'Holy devil!' muttered I, 'here
is a pleasant adventure! I even suspected as much.'</p>

<p>"'Nevertheless,' continued the horseman, as you <em>have</em> left your track,
you may as well leave it a little farther.
You will find shelter and food, though
both somewhat of the coarsest, about
a league farther on, in the village;
but if you turn back, it is most like
you will have to put up with a supperless nap by the road side. Your nag
must be well nigh on his last legs.
What a devil of a blunder!'</p>

<p>"'A devil of a blunder, indeed,'
echoed I. 'I see no better course
than that you recommend. About a
league a-head you say the village lies?'</p>

<p>"With these words I put my horse
again to a walk, intending, before I
reached my acquaintance—whom, in
spite of his frank air and honest voice, I
did not quite like—to stop under pretence of setting my saddle-girths to
rights; in reality, in order to let him
pass me without the necessity of turning my back upon him.</p>

<p>"'By Saint Anthony, signor,' exclaimed he, as I slowly approached
him, 'your horse has gone lame. This
is worse again: see, he stumbles. By
Bacchus, you must lead him and
walk.'</p>

<p>"It was indeed too true. Some
strain or damage received in scrambling through the broken inequalities
and obstructions of the road had indeed
rendered him perfectly lame.</p>

<p>"'Holy apostle!' cried my sympathetic acquaintance, this is the very
extremity of ill luck. Yes, you have,
indeed, but one course before you now,
and well if you can achieve it. You
must on to the village. Old Beppo
can afford shelter for the night, as
well as a fair bottle of wine, and in the
morning, if not before, he will set
your beast to rights. An honest companion is old Giuseppi, and a first-rate
farrier to boot. Three miles hence
you will find the old inn by the road
side. But here again—here is another
rub. <em>You</em> must follow the road we
are upon, seeing you know no other;
and thus, at once, we have the distance
doubled;—whereas, if you could but
make out your way by the bridle
track—Stay, it must want nearly
two good hours of midnight. I have
more than half a mind to turn about
and set you on the path. I'm time
enough—time enough, sir, for my
errand—a funeral—my old cousin's
funeral; but I am too early by an
hour or more. I can walk my horse
ten miles in little more than three
hours, and there I am before two
o'clock. So never make words about
it; I am your man: follow me. I'll
lead you as far as the two chestnut
trees, and thence I can point out the
path to you;—so that, unless misfortune is resolved to make a meal of
you, you can't well meet another mishap for this night.'</p>

<p>"So saying, my new friend put his
horse into a slow walk in the direction
in which I was about to move. 'Of
a truth,' thought I, a most accommodating gentleman!—somewhat suspicious, though; and yet why should he
seem less trustworthy in my eyes than
I in his? He may be, after all, a very
honest, inoffensive sort of person. At
all events, come what will, I cannot
part company unless <em>he</em> choose it; and,
after all, we stand but man to man—and the devil is in the dice if I cannot
make good my own in a fair field.'
With these encouraging reflections, I
followed my companion along the unequal road, under the broad shadowy
boughs of the wild wood, which
covered the sides of the glen.
The path, after many windings, opened
upon a wide level, surrounded by low
hills, and covered unequally by patches
of forest. As we pursued our way,
my comrade chatted gaily, now and
then interrupting his discourse with
some fragment of an ancient ditty, and
altogether with so frank and joyous
an air, that my suspicions gradually
disappeared, and instead of keeping
cautiously in the rear, I took my place
by his side. A handsome face, carrying an expression at once bold and
honest, and lit up, as it seemed habitually, with a reckless, jolly good
humour, further won upon my good
opinion. I laughed and talked freely
with him, and it was with real regret
that at length I reached the spot
where he was to leave me to explore
the rest of my way alone.</p>

<p>"'Here we are, signor,' said he,
reining in his steed—'here we are at
the two chestnuts, and here we part.
Now mark my directions, for a mistake
may cost you your supper. You see
that gray rock on which the moon is
shining. It stands just beside three
or four old trees. Pass by that and
turn to your right behind that dark
screen of wood; ride through the
open glade for about half a mile, and
when you reach the open ground, ride
right a-head, and a few hundred yards
will see you upon the road again:
then take the left hand, and ten minutes will bring you to the inn, the
first building you meet, a large house
with some old fruit trees about it—and so signor, good night.'</p>

<p>"With these words my companion
turned his horse's head away, and at a
slow trot began to retrace his steps.
I watched him until his receding
figure disappeared in the mists of
night; and then, with a light heart,
began to follow the course which he
had indicated.</p>

<p>"By a close attention to the directions which I had received, I reached
the road, and was proceeding leisurely
upon it toward the object of my immediate search, when my ear was
struck by the sound of a voice chanting a song, but so far away that I
could distinguish nothing more than
that the tones were those of a man.
As I rode on, however, the sounds
became more and more distinct, and
at length I clearly descried the object
from whence they issued. A little
man was seated by the road side, upon
a block of stone, or some other temporary resting-place, and, with folded
arms and his legs extended before him,
was chanting lustily, and with no very
harmonious cadences, some rude amatory verses. Upon seeing me he forthwith suspended his vocal exercises,
stood erect, walked two or three
paces away from the road—stopped,
turned round, and altogether appeared
very much discomposed by the interruption which my evidently unexpected
arrival had caused. Having exchanged
a courteous salutation, I had passed on
some short distance, when the little
man overtook me.</p>

<p>"'Signor,' said he, doffing his cap
with a lowly reverence, as soon as he
had reached my horse's head, 'will you
pardon a great liberty?'</p>

<p>"'Readily, I dare say,' replied I.
'Speak freely-can I serve you?'</p>

<p>"'Most essentially, your excellency,'
replied he. 'I am a poor man, a
trader in small wares: they are here
in my pack—the whole set are not
worth a ducat; and I have not sold to
the value of a baiocco. I am indeed,
sir, miserably poor—oh, miserably
poor!'</p>

<p>"'Do you want an alms?' inquired I.</p>

<p>"'No signor,' he replied; 'no, I
do not want alms, though I do not
know how soon I may,' he added hastily. 'Heaven knows I am wretchedly
poor!"</p>

<p>"'What, then, would you have
of me, in the name of patience?' cried
I. 'Speak out, man.'</p>

<p>"'Merely, sir,' replied he, with an
effort—'merely your company. I presume your course lies through some
neighbouring town, where I might get
my supper and rest. An onion and
a piece of bread supplies the one, and
an armful of straw the other. We
poor men must live as we may.'</p>

<p>"'You have rightly guessed,' replied I. I <em>am</em> on the way to a place
of refreshment; and unless the guide
with whom I have just parted has deceived me, we are now even within a mile
of it. So walk with me, and welcome.'</p>

<p>"The poor man was profuse in his
acknowledgments; and so, toward
the village we went, side by side. As
we proceeded, I could perceive pretty
plainly that my companion was by no
means well at ease. Many and fearful
glances he stole around, and not unfrequently I detected him in the act of
glancing stealthily and suspiciously at
myself. Whatever misgivings, however, he may have had respecting me,
they were soon laid at rest, and he
began to converse with me with less
reserve, and in a tone bordering upon
the confidential.</p>

<p>"'Signor,' said he, 'I am rather
a timid traveller, especially in the
neighbourhood of these hills. The
fact is, sir,' continued he, lowering his
voice to a whisper, 'I was once robbed
among them, about twenty years ago:
stripped to my skin, and nothing left
me but a pair of old trousers: and,
after all, I had a run of two miles or
more to get out of the villains' hands. I
should have died of fatigue and exhaustion but for the charity of some
good monks—the saints reward them!'</p>

<p>"The caution of the worthy pedlar
was, then, to say the least of it, perfectly justifiable; yet I own that I
frequently gratified my taste for the
comical during the course of our brief
journey, by practising upon the ever-wakeful fears of my companion—ample
opportunity for which was afforded in
the dim uncertain outline of the rocks
and underwood with which the ground
was unequally covered, and which, in
many places, offered a rude resemblance
to the outline of human figures grouped
together. Thus chatting, we had
ridden on for some time, when to my
infinite satisfaction, and no less so to
that of my companion, we came in
sight of the object of our march.</p>

<p>"The road, at the point at which
we had arrived, made a sudden sweep
down an abrupt descent, which terminated in the bottom of a glen, intersected in its middle by a winding
river, whose foam and eddies glittered
like silver in the moonlight. Over
this river the road was conducted by
an old ivy-mantled bridge, at the far
end of which stood the ruins of an
ancient town. Some fine old trees
cast their broad leaves over the road,
and sheltered, in picturesque groups,
a quaint and extensive building, which
stood upon the near side of the river,
having something of the mixed character of a house and a castle—in many
parts very much decayed and dilapidated, and in some even ruinous. The
deep-mouthed baying of a watch-dog
now arose from the solitary yard of
the old place, enhancing, if any thing
were required to do so, by its angry
howlings, the desolate and melancholy
character of the scene. This old
building, then, was the inn to which
my recent guide had directed me, and
a comfortless one, judging by external
appearances, it was likely to prove.
Arrived at the door, we gave summary
notice of our advent by repeated
knockings administered with hearty
good will, and accompanied by the
most vociferous clamours upon honest
Beppo. But although these noises,
by no means inconsiderable, were improved into a most energizing din by
the furious yellings of the watch-dog,
we had long to wait before our summons produced any other effect than
that of wearying ourselves. At length
a window at some height in the building was opened, and a shrill cracked
voice inquired, in no very courteous
tones, what we wanted. After some
parley, the window was closed again,
and in a short time an old grey-headed
little man, half habited, opened the
door, and after a curious scrutiny, assisted by the light of a small lamp
which he held in his hand, admitted
myself and my companion into a kind
of hall, whose shattered wainscotting
and ruinous appearance promised no
very cheering reception. Before entering, I transferred my pistols fron
the holster pipes to my coat pocket,
and throwing the reins upon my
horse's neck, trusted to his exhausted
condition to keep him from wandering
far. At the same time I directed the old
man, who was indeed Beppo himself,
to have the beast cared for. This
done, I followed mine host through
several passages and chambers, at the
end of which I found myself in a huge
old-fashioned kitchen, on whose hearth
blazed and crackled a cheerful fire of
wood. Stretched on the stone floor
before it lay two boys, fast asleep, and
by its side, in a chair, sat a girl, also
soundly slumbering. At the harsh
and well-known accents of old Beppo,
the three sleepers started to their feet,
and after some grumblings on their
part, and not a few oaths and imprecations on his, they began to apply
themselves in right earnest to make us
comfortable.</p>

<p>"Speedily were we, myself and my
humble companion, who at my invita
tion shared the repast, supplied with
a cold pasty and a steaming omelet,
and with right good will did we apply
ourselves to these right savoury viands,
seasoned, too, as I had been led to expect, with a bottle of excellent wine.
When I had somewhat appeased the
rage of hunger and thirst, I began
leisurely to scan the apartment and its
inmates. In the former I observed
nothing worthy of remark, but to my
no small surprise, among the latter I
recognised, in the girl whom I had
seen sleeping by the hearth on my entrance, a kitchen-wench, who having
served in the Picardi castle for several
years, had suddenly one night disappeared, without leaving any trace to
suggest whitherward she had gone, or
what had become of her. On seeing
and recognising this poor creature
thus unexpectedly, I was about to
utter an exclamation of surprise when
she checked me by a gesture of alarm
and impatience, accompanied by a
glance of peculiar significance towards
the old inn-keeper, who was now
standing before the fire, with his back
towards us. In compliance with the
mute direction of the girl, I thereupon
remained silent, having, by a repeated
and more accurate inspection, satisfied
myself of the identity of the person.
There was something in the expres
sion of face with which the girl had
glanced at the old man, brief though
that glance had been, which left upon
my mind an indefinable and unpleasant
impression; nor was this ambiguity of
feeling towards my host at all favourably determined by the peculiarities of
his outward man. He was, as I have
said, a small man, his body, disproportioned to his limbs, was long, and curved
like that of a wasp; his shoulders were
unusually narrow, and this defect was
rendered more conspicuously striking
by the enormous magnitude of his disproportioned head; his hair was grizzled and long, his eyebrows bushy, his
eyes restless, and in expression very
sinister, his nose flat and drooping, his
mouth large and furnished with a perfect row of jagged fangs. A considerable projection of the under jaw,
added to a face which expressed, in no
ordinary degree, cunning and deceit, a
character of sternness which, in moments of the smallest excitement,
amounted almost to ferocity. Such
features and such a cast of countenance were, in themselves, a cautionary
notice; and though clothed in all the
graces and smiles of what, from the
moment that my dress, which was of
rich material, caught the light, had
become a studiously courteous welcome, could not banish or disguise
what, in my mind, appeared the ineffaceable stamp of guilt. I know not
how it was, however, though thus
clearly appreciating the villanous character stamped upon the face of this
man, no shadow of suspicion or
thought of danger associated with
him for a moment crossed my mind;
on the contrary, I felt in unusual
spirits, and altogether free from reserve. I laughed, I joked, I sang
songs; I compelled the poor little
pedlar to do the same, and whether it
was that the snug fire and cosy
kitchen had kindled the spirit of the
vagrant merchant, or, as I more than
half suspect, that the wine of which he
had partaken contained some strange
ingredient, certain it is that he met my
gaiety with more than corresponding hilarity and confidence; he sang
his best songs, and told a hundred
stories of strange adventures, in which
he himself had played the part of
hero; he even went so far as to boast
of his bargains, and dropped plentiful
hints to the effect that he was by no
means so poor a man as he might seem,
and, in short, was to the full as indiscreet as I, if not more so.</p>

<p>"Suddenly, however, and almost in
the midst of his boisterous jollity, the
honest pedlar leaned back in his chair,
and was almost instantly fast asleep.
The inn-keeper shrugged his misshapen shoulders, smiled, and shook
his head, observing, at the same time,
'Poor devil! how tired he is—pity
such a light heart should have so hard
a trade. Would you, signor, desire
to see your chamber?'</p>

<p>"I assented.</p>

<p>"'Martha,' continued he, turning
to the girl, and pointing to the slumbering pedlar, 'let this honest man
have such a resting-place as you can
make out for him at so short notice.
You may as well make it here—not in
in <em>that</em> corner, devil!' he suddenly exclaimed, fixing on the girl a tremendous look—'not in that corner, you
limb of hell!' and then, after a pause,
he added, 'place it here, in the neighbourhood of the fire, snug and warm;
the poor man must be made comfortable. These sluttish servants,' continued he, probably in the way of apology for his unaccountable burst of
fury, 'are enough to make Job himself
blaspheme.'</p>

<p>"So saying, and muttering all the
way to himself, he led me through
several passages to the foot of a clumsy
and antique staircase of oak; this we
ascended, and traversing the creaking
and half rotten flooring of several
rooms, whose bare and mildewed
walls afforded but a dreary augury of
what I was to expect, my host threw
open a large door, with massive and
dingy pillars of carved wood at either
side, and with a low reverence informed me that this was my chamber.
I entered, and found a spacious apartment hung with dusty and tattered
tapestry, whose desolate appearance
was much enhanced by the absence of
all furniture, excepting a bed without
curtains, whose four tall posts stood at
their respective corners naked and
comfortless as the shorn masts of a
wreck; two or three old chairs and
one small table completed the garniture of the room. Opposite to the
foot of the bed, and at the same side
with the door through which we had
entered, was the hearth, exhibiting a
huge and shadowy chasm, which might
have stabled, at least, two horses comfortably. The cheerless aspect of
this place, with all its dust, cobwebs,
and nakedness about it, speedily subdued the frolicsome spirit which had
kindled so madly within me in the
snug old kitchen, by the roaring fire of
crackling faggots. There was something hungry and treacherous in the
dark and comfortless chamber, which
accorded well with the sinister and forbidding aspect of my host—something
which indistinctly boded danger, and
whispered to the startled ear <sc>beware</sc>!
My host placed the candle upon the
table, and, with another profound reverence and a courteous benediction,
took his departure.</p>

<p>"I was now alone. It is wonderful how intensely the outward seeming
of things, the mere form and colour
of what surrounds us, will move the
temper of the mind. Had my host
conducted me to a snug modern-looking
chamber of moderate dimensions, with
due allowance of tables, chairs, wardrobes, and curtains, and containing,
above all, a cheery fire in the grate, I
should probably have enjoyed the same
cheerful good humour, sleeping or
waking, throughout the night; but as
it was, in a vast and dim old chamber,
through whose damp vacancy a solitary candle shed a partial and uncertain light, if possible more depressing
than darkness itself, far, as it seemed,
from the inhabited part of the mansion,
and separated by a long succession of
passages, and chambers, and staircases,
which I should have been puzzled to
retrace, from all the human inhabitants
of the house, I felt, I knew not how, a
certain suspicion and uneasiness creep
over me, which I could neither account
for nor control. Without undressing,
I threw myself upon the bed, leaving
the candle burning upon the table beside me. I soon fell into an uneasy slumber, from which, however, I
speedily started with that vague sensation of horror which sometimes
overcomes the slumbering mind. I
gazed fearfully round the room; it was
empty as before. I sate up in the
bed, and raised the candle above my
head, that its light might fall more
distinctly on every object; but no,
there was nothing to awaken my
suspicions; all was silent, and just
as I had left it. I lay down again,
but could not sleep. I felt restless,
anxious, and almost awestruck. A
kind of vague, superstitious excitement came upon me; I could not
rest; I could not remain still; I got
up, and, taking the candle in my hand,
resolved to satisfy myself that nothing
was lurking in the obscure corners of
the room. I seized my naked sword in
one hand, and the candle in the other,
and proceeded to search every nook
and cranny of the chamber. I even
went so far as to examine the huge
chimney in its dark chasm the faint
light of the candle was lost at once,
and I remember well thrusting, as high
as my arm could reach with my rapier,
but without any result except that two
or three bats whirred down, and flitted
round me in wide, uneven circles.
Few who have ever indulged the kind
of uneasiness which at that moment
actuated me, can be ignorant that
when once yielded to, it asserts the
most capricious and unreasonable dominion over its victim, leading him, in
his fantastic search, to places which,
so far from affording verge enough to
a human being, could scarcely accommodate a reasonably-proportioned guinea-pig. In the course of my exploratory rambles, I clambered upon the
table to examine the window-sills,
which were placed high in the wall,
and deeply sunk, lest some assassin
should lie coiled in their recesses; and
although, as you may have easily anticipated, I found nothing of the kind,
yet my scrutiny was rewarded by a
discovery which did not tend to quiet
my uneasiness. This was no other
than a complete set of thick, and by
no means antique iron stauncheons,
strong and firmly sunk into the stone
window-frame above and below. Each
window exhibited the same sinister and
gaol-like security. I confess I thought
this precaution somewhat strange, nor
were my suspicions diminished by observing that these bars were unlike all
the other garniture of the room, sound
and in good repair, in some places exhibiting, apparently with the freshness
of yesterday, traces of the skill of the
plumber and the smith. I turned now
to the door, and opening it, looked
out upon the dark passage. There
was nothing there but the chill night
air, which floated cheerlessly into the
chamber, causing my candle to flare
and flicker like a torch. I closed it
again, and having examined the priming of my pistols, and laid them along
with my sword close beside me, I threw
myself once more upon the bed. I
scorned to admit even to myself that I
feared any thing. I had an unbounded
reliance upon my own activity and
strength, and a sanguine confidence in
my fortune. With my good weapons
beside me I set all odds at nought, and
though ever and anon something
within me whispered—'Leave this
room and get thee down—the Philistines be upon thee—bestir thyself,
lest they take thee sleeping'—yet such
thoughts crossed my mind but fleetingly, and were despised.</p>

<p>"As I lay thus listlessly, the sweet
slumbers of fatigue stole over me; the
chamber in which I lay gradually became confused and indistinct; my fatigues and anxieties were alike forgotten in deep and calm unconsciousness.</p>

<p>"From this state of happy oblivion
I was aroused by the pressure of a
hand upon my shoulder, and the administration of two or three impatient
jolts thoroughly awakened me. I started
upright in the bed, and mechanically
stretched my hand towards the pistols
which lay beside me. The precaution
was unnecessary; my visitor was a female—the poor girl whose person I
had recognised in the kitchen before.
The candle had hardly wasted since I
had closed my eyes; I could not have
slept a quarter of an hour. I gazed
fixedly upon the features of the servant girl; they were tense and pale as
those of death: there was such mortal
agitation in the face as filled my mind
with awe. With an impressive and
imploring gesture, several times repeated, she enjoined silence, and then
leaning forward, she whispered with
slow and startling emphasis—</p>

<p>"'Within a few minutes, <em>murderers</em>
will come to your bedside: I wish you
to escape. Draw the tapestry at this
side of your bed; you will find a door
behind it; a long passage leads from
it to a flight of steps, and they to the
kitchen. Wait at the head of the
stairs with your drawn sword in your
hand, and when you hear me say, God
send us all better days, it shall be a
signal to you that one of them is about
to enter from the kitchen the passage
where you stand; drive the sword
through him, and run into the kitchen,
where you will find another, perhaps
two; I shall take care that no more
are there. Be firm, and pray to God.'</p>

<p>"With these words she glided
speedily from the room, leaving me
horror-struck at the sudden and
ghastly intimation. With silent rapidity I rose from the bed—my preparations were speedily made. I stuck
my pistols in my belt, and taking
my naked sword under my arm, I
soon found the door which my protectress had described. I extinguished
the candle, and, entering the passage,
closed the door behind me.</p>

<p>"This passage was extremely narrow and low; the floor and ceiling
were of stone; and, as I imagined, its
whole width lay in the thickness of the
wall. Along this strange corridor I
cautiously pushed my way; and, after
a progress which appeared all but interminable, I reached the first of a flight
of steep stone steps, leading downwards, and here I paused. I had
hardly ceased to move when I became
conscious that every sound, even that
of the lightest foot-tread upon the
kitchen floor, was distinctly audible
where I stood. I heard the shuffling of many feet to and fro, accompanied by a great deal of whispering. These sounds continuing for a
long time, without being followed by
any decisive result, my nerves were
gradually wrought by the suspense in
which I stood to such a pitch of excitement, that I could not remain still.
I descended the stairs with the utmost
caution. When I had reached the foot,
I found a space which afforded little
more than standing room. Straight
before me, and within a few inches of
my face, was the door which opened
upon the kitchen. This was a double
door, constructed, as I afterwards
found, so as to resemble from without
a sort of cupboard. A broad chink in
the centre, where the two valves met,
admitted a bright stream of light;
and placing my eye at the aperture, I
witnessed, unobserved, a scene which
no occurrence of my after life has
availed to obliterate.</p>

<p>"At the side of the chamber opposite
to that at which I was placed, stood
the bed in which lay the poor pedlar:
his deep stertorous breathing sufficiently attested the soundness of the
slumber in which he was locked. A
blazing faggot flamed and flickered on
the hearth, throwing an intense but
uncertain light over the whole scene.
Close by the fire stood two stout fellows, in one of whom I recognised,
without difficulty, my good-humoured
guide. Beside them sat a third, with
his legs extended towards the cheering
blaze, while with an air of sublime
abstraction, he leisurely smoked a long
pipe. At the same time I observed
the girl to whom I owed the timely
warning, whose success was yet so
doubtful, employed in carrying towards
the bed in which my poor comrade was
sleeping, a large tub, or bucket, Beside the bed stood Giuseppe himself,
a hideous incarnation of evil, glaring
upon the unconscious slumberer. A
boy, resting his head upon the foot of
the bed, was fast asleep also. Such
was the scene which my first glance
through the aperture of the door revealed, under the fierce and restless
light of the blazing wood fire. The
baleful and ominous scowl which darkened the features of the ill-favoured
innkeeper, and something like a foreboding of what was about to happen,
rivetted my attention to the group
about the humble bed where the poor
little traveller lay. The innkeeper
stooped forward, and with a sudden
jerk of his hand threw the bed-clothes
down, so as to leave the upper part of
the body of the sleeper bare, except
for the coarse shirt which covered it.
He next slid his arm gently under the
shoulders of the unconscious man, and
slowly drew his body towards the edge
of the bed. At this moment the girl
placed the bucket at the side of the
pallet, and with an expression of
strange horror turned towards the
door where I stood, and passed on
from my sight. Giuseppe now drew
the shoulders completely over the
edge of the couch, so that the head
hung down towards the floor. The
poor wretch continued to sleep. The
innkeeper beckoned now to one of
his companions, who stood at the fire.
The man came over to the bed, and
listlessly shoved the bucket with his
foot, until he had brought it directly
under the head of the sleeping man.
I could endure no more. My resolution was taken. I set my shoulder
against the door, and strained every
muscle in my body in the desperate
effort to burst it open. The effort, tre
mendous though it was, was made in
vain. The door was fastened without,
and that so effectually, that the assault
with which I had just taxed its
strength had hardly availed to make
the fastenings creak. Well was it for
me, however, that this sound, slight
though it was, occurred while the vil
lain was shoving the bucket, as I have
just told you, with his foot along the
floor. Had that little sound but
reached the ear of any of the wretches
who occupied the chamber, I must
have perished. On such threads hang
the lives of men! Weak and ex.
hausted by the fruitless effort which I
had made, I resigned myself in mute
horror to witness the tragedy which I
had no power to prevent. Giuseppe
now, in a whisper which froze the life-blood at my heart, repeated the signi
ficant words—'Il coltello,' <i>the knife</i>.
His companion instantly turned to a
cupboard, a few steps aside, and returned bearing in his hand the instru
ment, whose broad blade, as he walked
along, he wiped in his jacket sleeve.
The cold sweat burst from every pore
in my body. I shook like a man in an
ague: a deadly sickness came over
me; yet I could not move my eyes
from the objects, the sight of which
filled me with this agony. The man,
with the knife in his grasp, now placed
himself by the bed, half sitting upon
its edge. Giuseppe took the head of
the sleeping man between his hands,
and supported it with the face turned
directly towards the place where I
stood. His companion now applied
the edge of the knife to the skin of the
throat, and moving it slightly along
the surface, until it rested upon the
spot which he judged most suitable to
his purpose, he laid the palm of his
left hand upon the back of the blade,
and with his whole weight and strength
forced it with a mangling gash, sq
far as almost to sever the head from
the body. The crimson blood gushed,
or rather spouted, from the chasm,
and, with a gurgling sound, poured
into the bucket. At the same moment
the assassin, dropping the knife upon
the floor, threw himself across the
body, to control the convulsive strugglings of death. The pedlar had continued fast locked in sleep, until the
knife had actually entered his throat.
The moment, however, that the fatal
stroke was given, the murdered man
opened his eyes, and gazed with such
an expression of imploring terror and
agony, as fancy never beheld. At the
same time he opened his mouth—perhaps to shriek—perhaps to pray; but
sound was never more to come from
thence. Blood bubbled forth, and
streamed over his white and quivering
face. Again and again he opened his
mouth with ghastly strugglings. Nor
did this fearful motion cease, until the
eye fixed, and the mortal agony ended
in death. The innkeeper then wrung
the head round, while his companion,
with the same knife, ploughed through
the tendons and muscles, until they
succeeded in actually cutting the head
from the trunk. The body lay upon
the bed, and the neck still hung bleeding over the tub, into which Giuseppe
dropped the head. I could see no
more. My brain grew dizzy. A sick
faintness came upon me. I clambered,
I know not how, up the stairs, and,
sitting down upon the uppermost step,
I clasped my damp forehead in my
hands, and remained for some minutes
almost unconscious of every thing, absorbed in one dull, vague feeling of
horror.</p>

<p>As soon as I came a little to myself,
I plainly perceived, by what I could
gather from the whisperings which I
overheard from below, that the murderers were engaged in removing the
body of their victim. Steps now slowly
and unsteadily traversed the kitchen—I suppose those of him who carried the
horrible burthen. The outer door was
cautiously opened; the steps passed
forth, and the door again closed.</p>

<p>"'The gentleman sleeps like a top,'
whispered a gruff voice. 'He has
put out his candle, and lies still as a
dormouse.'</p>

<p>"'Take your stiletto,' replied
another. 'Morning will break before
you have finished.'</p>

<p>"'Remove your boots, bungler,'
cried a female voice. 'Your spurs
make jingle enough to ring the dead
from their graves.'</p>

<p>"Peace, gaol-bird,' cried Giuseppe.
'What's that to thee.'</p>

<p>"'Well, well,' exclaimed the girl,
with a slow distinct utterance, 'God
grant us all better days.'</p>

<p>"I needed not the warning, I had
already placed myself in readiness.
After a short delay the door, through
which I had just witnessed the scene
which I have attempted to describe,
opened wide. A broad light flashed
upon the rugged and narrow stairs,
and a tall figure began to ascend. I
stood in the deep shadow awaiting
his advance; and as soon as he had
arrived within two or three steps of
the top, I sprang forward, and lunged
full at his breast. This was not done
so quickly that he did not catch a
glimpse of me, as I'started forward, in
sufficient time to enable him with his
arm imperfectly to parry the thrust.
As it happened, however, this was all
the worse for himself; for instead of
turning the sword aside, he merely
struck the point upwards, and it entered somewhere near the eye, and,
penetrating the brain, killed him on
the spot. Without a groan he tumbled headlong over the steps. Springing over his prostrate body, I rushed
into the kitchen. Giuseppe and my
honest guide were the only males
within it. The latter stood nearest
to me, and his astonishment at my
entrance was such that he did not
move. With a deliberate aim of two
seconds, I levelled my pistol at his
breast and fired, he fell—I know not
whether mortally hurt or not, but
I never saw him move again. Without the loss of an instant I levelled
the second pistol at the innkeeper—but it missed fire—the wretch ran
directly to the door, but before his
hand had reached the latch I was up
with him. With a hideous yell of
defiance he sprang round and grappled with me. His strength far
exceeded what his figure seemed to
promise; but I felt that he was still
no match for me. In a moment I
hurled him back upon the gory pallet,
and planted my knee upon his breast.
As we struggled, he caught my left
thumb within his teeth, and clenched
them upon it until they fairly ground
upon the bone. Heedless of the pain,
I clutched his throat in my right
hand, and pressed with all my might
and strength—in vain he struggled—the eyes started—the face blackened.
Froth covered my hands, and before
two minutes he lay insensible.</p>

<p>"'For God's sake, girl,' cried I,
'give me the pistol.' Silently she
obeyed me, and for a moment relaxing my grasp, I seized the weapon by
the muzzle, and dashed the heavy butt
into his skull—he was dead. Yet
such was the strength with which his
teeth were locked upon my thumb,
that I could not release it until I had
beaten out nearly half his teeth, I forced
the barrel of the pistol into his mouth,
and employing it as a lever, I, with
much exertion, unlocked the clenched
teeth, and loosed the mangled joint.
At this moment I heard a heavy step
without, the latch was raised, and one
of the fellows who had been present
at the murder of the pedlar entered.
I did not give him time to recover his
surprise, but placing the pistol to his
head, I said in a stern and determined
voice—'Villain! lead me to a horse.
If I am discovered or interrupted, I
will blow your brains out.'</p>

<p>"'Good Signor,' said the fellow,
evidently ill at his ease, 'patience for
heaven's sake—be not rash.'</p>

<p>“'I give you five seconds,' replied
I, 'to bring me to a horse: at the end
of that time, the condition unfulfilled,
I will shoot you through the head, as
sure as God is in heaven. Look at
those corpses—you see I am in earnest.'</p>

<p>"The fellow said not one word more;
but, being himself unarmed, led me
quietly from the door of the inn at
which we stood to that of the stable.
I all the time holding him by the back
of the collar, with the pistol close by
his head.</p>

<p>"'Choose a strong one, scoundrel,'
said I, as we entered the stable, in
which stood several horses ready saddled. I compelled him to lead out
the steed, and to mount first himself,
and springing up behind him, I commanded him to ride on the shortest
track leading to the high road to
Rome. The moon had gone down,
and the night was now so dark that I
could not see many yards before me.
In obedience to my directions the
fellow rode at a hard trot. We had
scarcely crossed the bridge, when two
figures loomed suddenly in sight, and
so directly in advance of us that it
required a sudden and violent exertion
of the bit which threw the animal
back upon his haunches, to prevent
our running foul of this nocturnal
patrol.</p>

<p>"'Who rides so hard?' inquired
one in no very dulcet accents. Here
I pressed the muzzle of the pistol
against my companion's head, as a
salutary hint.</p>

<p>"'Who should it be,' exclaimed
my comrade, 'but a friend—do not
you know me?'</p>

<p>"'Faith, brother,' replied the same
harsh voice, it is well we did not
rob thee, and thou us;' and marvellously tickled with this pleasant conceit
he laughed long and lustily. 'Any
news?' added he—'any rabbits in
the burrow? any nightingales in the
cage—eh?'</p>

<p>"'Ay, two,' replied my companion, 'with their necks wrung. You
will see more at the inn. Good
night.'</p>

<p>We were passing on, when again
one of them exclaimed—</p>

<p>"'Hey! what the devil have you
gotten behind you?'</p>

<p>"Again, I let my honest companion feel that the weapon rested upon
his skull; and with much nonchalance,
he replied—</p>

<p>"'What is behind me? why a bag
of bloody carrion, if you must have
it—but we bandy words two long—when I get rid of this, I'll find you at
old Beppo's.'</p>

<p>"'Well, good luck, most holy sexton,'
replied the horseman; 'and as for
your burthen, <i>requiescat in pace</i>—<i>amen</i>.'</p>

<p>"'So saying, the two horsemen rode
on, and we pursued our way, at the same
hard pace until the morning's light
began to streak the east.</p>

<p>"Watching my opportunity as we
rode rapidly down a steep declivity,
I bestowed my companion a vigorous
shove, which sent him clean over the
horse's head; and before he had well
done rolling I had left him four hundred yards behind me. With a courteous valediction I rode on, and without
another adventure reached the glorious city of Rome, where strange
things befel me, as I shall tell you.
But first give me a cup of wine."</p>
			</section>
			<section id="spalatro-part-2" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3>
					<span epub:type="label">Part</span>
					<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
				</h3>
<p>"In the heart of a gay capital, possessed of funds which, to my short-sighted inexperience, seemed all but
inexhaustible, full of ardour, curiosity,
and passion, I threw myself heart and
soul into the intoxication and excitement of all the folly, vice, and extravagance which revolved around me;
with more of inquisitiveness than of
depravity, I hunted out vice in all its
secure and secret haunts, where, undisguised, and maddening, and terrible,
it ruled and rioted. The adventures
and perils of the wild scenes in which
I mixed, had for me a strange attraction; I panted to eat of the tree
of the knowledge of good and evil;
I longed to try and prove those old
and mighty rulers of the human kind—the ancient vices of the world in
the high places of their power; recklessly I courted danger: wildly I
plunged into the unfathomable gulf
of sin, and madly did time fly by.</p>

<p>"My acquaintances were among the
madcap young nobles of the city.
There was nothing to withdraw me
from the headlong career of sins and
follies in which I was borne, except
prudence or religion—and I had neither. I resolutely closed my eyes
against all distant consequences: I
saw but the present—I <em>would</em> see no
more. I felt that when my wealth
was squandered, I would find a way to
get more; I cared not how, provided
it were boldly, and in the manner of
a soldier of fortune. Even then my
coming destiny filled the vision of my
mind; I beheld it perhaps with awe,
but undismayed; for me it had a
dreadful fascination—I rushed towards
it with a bosom full of defiance and
scornful recklessness.</p>

<p>"Fagged and jaded with the last
night's debauch, I rose towards evening from the numb and heavy sleep
of excess, and wandered forth to
breathe the fresh air upon the Corso.
It was the carnival—the streets were
thronged with masks, jugglers, itinerant gamesters with their various apparatus for cheating the incautious;
mountebanks and empirics holding
forth upon their crazy stages; noble
ladies in rich attire walking with
their high-born protectors, and shouldered and jostled by countrymen
and beggars—all mingled up in the
fantastic mazes of a bewildering and
gorgeous dream. Captivated by the
never-ending variety of the scene before me; hour after hour flew by;
and when at length the sun went down,
and twilight was succeeded by the wan
splendour of the moon, I still was
sauntering among the gay and idle
throng, whose groups crossed and
fitted before my eyes in such rich
and grotesque contrariety. 'Why so
sad, young gentleman?' exclaimed a
voice close by my ear, while, at the
same time, a party-coloured sword of
lath was laid smartly upon my shoulder. The speaker was a harlequin,
who had turned for a moment from
his masked companions to accost me.
'Has thy lady-love frowned, or thy
Jew friend been cruel? has thy luck
been hard, and thine head soft? are
thy creditors more than thy credit?
art thou hungry, or thy sweetheart
angry? has she broke her faith, and
thou not thy fast? if so, sour looks
will never mend the matter—lament
to-morrow, but laugh to-night. The
gods have given but one excuse
for glum looks during carnival, and
that is the cholic. If thou hast it,
thou art right to be religious; but
get thee home and pray in bed: thy
public piety is a public nuisance. Owlet,
avaunt!' A loud smack from his lath
weapon enforced the mandate, and
under cover of the horse laugh with
which the crowd greeted the conclusion of his lecture, the mask unperceived whispered sharply in my ear as
he passed—'Keep your eye on me,
friend, and follow me; your doing so
may save your life. Enough.' With
these strange words he plunged once
more into the crowd, and mingled as
before in the madcap gaieties of the
scene. My curiosity was however excited. I followed him carefully, and
thought I could observe him occasionally abstract his attention for a moment from the tricks and railleries
with which he abundantly entertained
the multitude, to steal a glance toward me, and ascertain that I was
present. Gradually the harlequin withdrew himself from the group with
which he had borne his part, and by
little and little separated himself from
the crowd, I still following at a short
distance. With many a fantastic pirouette and gambol away he flitted
through by-lanes and alleys. Again
and again was I obliged to run at the
top of my speed to keep my strange
conductor in view, watching the tall
light form with a vigilance so close
and exclusive that I knew not through
what streets I passed, and scarcely in
what direction I was moving. We
passed through the scattered houses
of the suburbs; and although I strained
my sinews to the utmost, my guide
gained upon me so fast that I began
to grow fearful of losing him altogether. He was now running lightly
by the banks of the Tiber—we had
passed the thronged dwellings of the
city; and the cool air from the quiet
country came rushing along the waters,
the grateful and refreshing gift of
nature. Half vexed at the pertinacious speed with which my companion pursued his course, and half-suspecting the whole affair to be a hoax,
I was just about to stop and turn
about, when my intention was anticipated by the mask. He suddenly
checked his course, sprang into the
air, and, with a grotesque flourish of
his sword, turned to the right about,
awaiting with a low mock reverence
my breathless pursuit. I was soon by
his side. 'Now in the devil's name,
sir harlequin,' exclaimed I, 'for what
have you given me this unconscionable
race?—your tidings must needs be
worth the hearing when a man must
run after them as if Beelzebub ran
at his heels.' 'Fie, fie,' cried the
mask, 'devil and Beelzebub' are ugly
words, and especially <em>now</em> and <em>here</em>.
Be, I pray you, a little more pious:
you know not what may be near you.'
At these words my companion stooped
down and lowered his head to a level
with the reeds which grew by the
river's brink, in the attitude of one who
listens attentively for some distant
sound—then raising himself, he added
in a lower tone, 'We must go further; follow me yet a few steps
more.' Accordingly he led the way
along the river bank, but now at
a slow pace. As he went along
he began to sing a strange and
mournful air, the like of which I never heard before or since, and <em>that</em>
with a management of voice, if possible, stranger still. It appeared to me
like the most extraordinary ventriloquism; for the sounds seemed sometimes to come from one side—sometimes from another—sometimes high
in air—sometimes so far away as almost to be lost in the distance, and
again swelling into a fierce and thrilling loudness, as if the voice was rushing toward us with the speed of a
whirlwind. I cannot describe to you
the strange effect of this music upon
me: I felt ready either to laugh or
cry—I felt a weight at my heart and
an excitement in my head more than
hysterical. The words which he sang
were odd, and to me unintelligible;
but he threw into them a laboured
significance which added to the unpleasantness of the whole. The words
have remained fixed in my mind, and
to this day I cannot utter them without
sensations which perhaps you would
laugh at. They ran as follows:—</p>

<p><span>"Child of wrath, with the human bride,</span><br/>
<span>Mighty oppressor of earthly kind,</span><br/>
<span>Thy presence walks with us, side by
side.</span></br>
<span>I feel thee, and know thy soft laugh
on the wind.</span></br>
<span>Kiss, kiss his hot lips again and
again;</span></br>
<span>He has given thee his heart; now
master his brain."</span></br></p>

<p>"The excitement under which I
laboured increased until it amounted
to a degree of horror almost unendurable. Under the vague impulse of
superstitious terror, I was about to
turn and run from my companion,
when he, suddenly looking round, exhibited to my astounded sense the features of the hoary monk or <strong>demon</strong>,
Father Anthony. Nerved by the extremity of terror, I turned my back
upon the abhorred shape, and fled with
the speed of light toward the city.
The attempt to escape was utterly in
vain. Though I ran with a speed
which nothing but the agony of terror could have sustained, the fiendish
monk not only kept up with me, but
ran round and round me-sometimes
in narrower, sometimes in wider circles, with gambols of preterhuman
agility, and grimaces more hideous
than night-mare ever saw. Suddenly
he stopped short before me, and by an
unearthly sympathy I was constrained
to do the same: he sate down upon
the earth; by an irresistible impulse
I did so likewise. We were opposite
to one another—face to face, and
scarcely a yard asunder. He tossed
his arms wildly in the air—I could
not choose but do the same he
writhed his features into contortions
such as delirium never portrayed, each
one of which, with frenzied exaggeration, I felt forced to imitate. Into
these hideous grimaces he threw, at
times, expressions of demoniac passion
so fearfully intense, that hell itself
could not have exceeded them: these
too, I was forced to follow, and the
dreadful passions themselves possessed
me in succession, while all the time,
independently of these malignant inspirations, there remained within me,
as it were looking on, a terrified self-consciousness. He yelled forth blasphemies the most awful, while my very
brain sickened with horror—the unearthly power constrained me to echo
them all, tone for tone, and word for
word. He advanced his face, I did
the same—our features almost touched.
He burst into a peal of laughter like
that of lunacy, I joined howling in
the horrible mirth. Every word <em>he</em>
spoke, <em>I</em> spoke—every movement <em>he</em>
made, <em>I</em> made too. My motions all
corresponded with his, with the simultaneousness and accuracy with which
shadow follows substance; I felt as if
my identity was merging into his. He
placed his hand within his bosom—my
hand copied the gesture, and rested
upon my stiletto; he drew a dagger
from his breast—I drew my poignard
from mine. At the next instant his
weapon was at his throat, and mine
at mine. Another moment, and <strong>hell</strong>
would have had its victim; but it was
to be otherwise. A voice close by
shouted, 'In the name of God, young
man, forbear,' and at the instant I
was disenthralled; the hideous figure
cast upon me one livid scowl, and
threw himself on the ground. I saw
no more, for my senses forsook me.
How long the demon had made me
the sport of his hellish mockeries I
cannot say. As soon as consciousness returned I found myself supported
in the arms of an honest peasant—he
to whose intervention I owed my life.</p>

<p>"'So, so, master,' exclaimed he,
'a pleasant frolic this, for the carnival—time was, when you youngsters were
satisfied with carving your neighbours'
throats, but nothing will serve you
now, forsooth, but cutting your own.
In God's name, young man, why do
you seek to harm yourself?"</p>

<p>"'Tell me,' said I eagerly, where
he is gone—where is the mask—the
harlequin—the devil? Bring me away
from this place. Where is the monster
you saw before me?'</p>

<p>"'Sir,' replied the man, I see you
are disordered. I will go with you to
the town; here, take my arm.'</p>

<p>"'Where,' I said with increased
excitement, 'where is the hellish
thing that sate on the ground before
me?'</p>

<p>“'Pshaw, sir,' replied he, 'there
was nothing before you but yonder old
bush; to be sure,' he added, after a
thoughtful pause, 'it did sway and
tremble rather oddly; and then,
when I came up, I saw something
like an otter sliding softly through the
sedges into the stream. But that is
all—come on, signor, let us he moving.'</p>

<p>"Silently I walked with my friendly
guide, who cast 'many a fearful look
around, and muttered many a prayer as
we proceeded—so contagious is mysterious terror.</p>

<p>"For more than a month I was in
mind and body utterly prostrate.
There is in youth, however, a recuperative power, an elasticity which never
loses its spring while youth remains.
In five weeks' time, after an illness,
during which mind and body were
bound down in the fiery chains of fever
for nearly the space of a month, I was
once more mingling in all the pleasures
and follies of the capital, as if no fears
or perils had ever crossed me. As time
wore on, I began to grow weary of
uncontrolled indulgence. Fashion is
a hard task-master—vice and pleasure
tire their pursuers at length more than
the severest toil—monotony dulls the
edge of enjoyment, and the solicitous
repinings of conscience wear the spirits,
and irritate and embitter the temper;
all this I felt, and half (but <em>only</em> half)
resolved to reform, and lead a better
life. In this melancholy mood I was
wandering through the oldest and least-frequented streets of the city, when a
singular adventure befel me. There
was walking before me, with slow and
feeble steps, an old and venerable man;
his dress was of the richest velvet of
that hue which we call <em>ruby</em>, lined with
yellow satin, and richly overlaid with
gold lace; the fashion, however, of his
garments was that of another day, and
though the suit was no doubt originally
a splendid one, it bore no less in its
faded colour and tarnished embroidery,
than in its obsolete construction, the
evidences of extreme antiquity. From
under the shadow of a broad-leafed
hat his snow-white hair descended in
venerable ringlets, covering the topmost folds of his short velvet cloak.
In his hand he carried a crutch-handled
stick of ebony, which, with measured
and solemn action, he impressed upon
the pavement as he proceeded. The
figure of the old man was slight, and
as well as I could discern, elegantly
moulded; he bore about him, too, that
indescribable air of high birth and
breeding which cannot be mistaken.
These circumstances, along with the
striking peculiarities of which I have
already spoken, irresistibly fixed my
attention and engaged my curiosity.
As I followed in the track of this old
man, he suddenly tottered, as if through
weakness or giddiness, and would, no
doubt, have fallen upon the pavement,
had not I instantly caught him in my
arms and supported him. He speedily
recovered, and with many courteous
professions of gratitude, acknowledged
my services. These professions were
as courteously received as made, and I
offered the aged man the support of
my arm, during the remainder of his
walk. The tender of my support was
accepted with eager gratitude, and arm
in arm, at a leisurely pace, we walked
down the street together. The old man,
as I have said, was soon quite recovered; and as we moved slowly along,
he conversed with that easy and courtly
gaiety by which age can so pleasingly
and irresistibly engage and fascinate the
young. Almost without knowing how,
so pleasantly had my companion beguiled the way, I found myself at the
entrance of a venerable mansion, before which my <em>old</em> acquaintance made
a halt. I looked around me, for so
completely had my attention been absorbed in the gay conversation of my
comrade, that I had scarcely observed
the objects through which we were
passing. The street was dark and narrow—the houses on either side tall,
sombre, and antique, and withal carrying upon them a character of decay
and neglect which added gloom and
sadness to a scene already sufficiently
uncheery. The street had made a
curving sweep, so that at the point
where we stood I could see but little way either up or down. As far as
I could see, however, it was absolutely
empty there was neither sound of
human voice, nor echo of foot-falls,
but a silence like that of desolation.
We stood directly in front of a richly-carved and massive stone door-way,
the portal of a huge time-worn edifice—a palace, but so weather-stained, neglected, and crumbling, that the evidences of its original architectural
splendour served only to render its
present aspect more solemn and more
sad. Reading, perhaps, in my face
what was passing in my mind, the old
man, with a melancholy musing smile,
accosted me—</p>

<p>“'It is, indeed, a mournful place—little better, perhaps, than a ruin; the
street, too, as you observe, well accords
with the character of this deserted
shrine of hospitality—the spirit of desolation dwells in and about it—the
current of human life frets and chafes
near and far, but no chance eddy thereof ever finds its way into this dim,
silent channel. The roar of human
occupation, toil, and jollity, is here
swallowed in perennial silence—we
never hear it—in almost every house
this street contains, you see the monument of some noble family gone to
ruin, wasted by prodigality, or struck
down into the dust by the heavy arm
of power. Those who dwell here seldom seek to look into the staring, noisy
world; they think not of the present,
but ever upon the past—and oh! how
variously. Silence here holds her eternal court—see, lest any careless footstep should break the quiet of the
place, gentle dame Nature has spread
her soft green mantle over the uneven
pavement—the long grass waves in the
wind here as in a church-yard: yet,
amid all this lonely silence, is there
any quiet for heart or brain? Oh, eternal,
unforgiving spirit! is there any rest—is there any unconsciousness?'</p>

<p>"He clasped his hands together—his head sank upon his breast, and I
saw the tears fall, one by one, fast upon
his bosom.</p>

<p>"More shocked than I can describe
at what I heard and saw, I stood silently
by, scarcely knowing what course to
take. I soon, however, grew weary of
my foolish situation, and, beginning to
regard the whole thing as rather comic
than imposing, I asked, somewhat abruptly, whether I could do any thing
further for him, at the same time observing that the evening would soon
close, and that I had better find my
way home while I had light. This
speech soon brought the old gentleman
to his senses. With many apologies
he pleaded to be excused.</p>

<p>"'Signor,' he continued, 'did you
but know half what I have endured, far
less what I <em>must still</em> endure, you would
pardon this else unpardonable vehemence. I will not, however, weary
you with, after all, what is but too
common a tale. Those who have seen
as much of life as I have, are seldom
happy. I can, however, as you perhaps
have perceived, sometimes forget my
griefs; and if you will vouch your forgiveness, by entering so poor and unpromising a dwelling as that before
you, you will make me more your
debtor, sir, than I am.'</p>

<p>"There was a gentleness and even
a kindness in the tone and manner in
which the old man addressed me which
easily prevailed. I at once consented.</p>

<p>"From his pocket he drew a key, to
which the street door instantly yielded.
Closing the hall-door, which was of
massive oak, behind us, he led the way
through a stone vaulted passage, and
through another door into a spacious
and lofty hall, also vaulted, and built
of stone; this latter door he also
swung to with a heavy crash, which
echoed through the empty chamber
with many a dreary reverberation.
The room in which we now stood was
hung round with splendid full-length
pictures. It seemed to be a gallery of
ancestral portraits. They were superbly painted—evidently from the
hands of the most celebrated of our
Italian masters: the collection was
worth a monarch's ransom.</p>

<p>"'You will find occupation for a few
minutes in looking at these old family
pictures,' said my host; 'and you will,
I hope, pardon me if I leave you to
entertain yourself for a brief space.'
So saying, the old man made a deep
reverence, and before I had time to
reply, he darted through a door at the
far extremity of the apartment, and
disappeared.</p>

<p>"The pictures were very well worth
an attentive examination, and afforded
me no small pleasure. But there were
three placed side by side, over each of
which hung from top to bottom a black
velvet pall, and although not without
some reluctance upon the score of good
breeding, to these my curiosity led me by
an irresistible attraction. I took my stand
upon a stool which stood beneath thein
against the wall, and raising the covering of the first, I beheld a faithful and
very beautifully painted portrait of my
entertainer, arrayed precisely as I had
seen him. The painting looked old,
and yet it represented him not as any
younger than he now was. While
musing upon this discrepancy, my eye
accidentally fell upon some numerals
dimly traced in one corner of the canvass. Heavens! the date they recorded
was that of more than a century before; yet the portrait was undoubtedly
his. It was a perfect likeness—character, expression, every thing—it
was a <i>fac simile</i> of the original. My
convictions, too, were yet further esta
blished by observing traces upon the
back of the right hand, which rested
upon a crutch-handle stick, a deep
scar, which had caught my attention in
the original, as his hand lay within my
arm in our to-day's walk. Again I
examined the date, I had read it aright—the year it recorded had been passed
nearly a century and a half before,
and the mellow tone of the picture
itself tallied well with its silent but
startling claim to antiquity. With a
strange feeling of interest and of horror I suffered the sable drapery to fall
again over the picture; and raising the
covering of the next, I beheld the portrait of a young lady, richly dressed,
and of such surpassing loveliness and
grace as my eyes had never seen before. Entranced—lost in wonder and
rapture, I gazed upon this beautiful
vision; a creature so perfect, of such
unutterable, such infinite loveliness had
never even dimly visited me in my most
ethereal fancies. Like one lost in a
sad and beautiful dream, I stood wrapt
and moveless, my heart wrung with
vain yearnings, for still the thought
stole over me that all this most terrible
beauty before whose image I stood in
this intense worship of every faculty,
had long ago passed to dust and darkness. Thus gazing and dreaming on,
the tears flowed silently down my
cheeks. Strange fascination!</p>

<p>"'You make yourself at home,
signor, I'm glad to see,' said the old
man, who, unperceived by me was
standing by my shoulder.</p>

<p>"I started, and dropped the velvet
curtain, and was for some time so confounded as not to be able to articulate
a single word. There stood the old
man, his figure disposed in precisely
the attitude represented in the portrait, his tall crutch-handled stick in
his right hand, and his left buried to
the wrist in the bosom of his doublet;
there he stood in all points—face, attitude, and garb, the breathing incarnation of the picture on which I had just
been looking.</p>

<p>"'You examined, then, these portraits?' inquired the old man.</p>

<p>"'Two of them, signor,' I replied
with some embarrassment.</p>

<p>"'This one,' continued he, raising
the pall which covered the first, 'is
accounted extremely like me: it is
the portrait of one of my house, a
brave man, who fell one hundred and
forty years since in the service of the
state of Venice. I am reckoned like
him, strangers at least account me
so.'</p>

<p>"He fixed his eyes upon me, I
thought with that uncertain, curious
gaze with which those who feel themselves the objects of suspicion, encounter a glance of scrutiny. I averted
my eyes, and he, suffering the velvet
cloth to drop into its place, turned
upon his heel and walked twice or
thrice rapidly through the hall;
he stopped beside me, and laying his hand
kindly upon my shoulder, he said—</p>

<p>"'Come, come, you must not grow
melancholy, my young friend; you
were looking, when I surprised you,
at a portrait of singular beauty, that of
a young woman. You shall probably
have an opportunity before long of
comparing the counterfeit with the
original. Will not that bring a smile
to your cheek? time was when such
a promise would have led me blindfold any where; but I am partial, perhaps, she is my daughter.'</p>

<p>"If the old man looked for compliments upon the beauty of his child, I
believe he must have been satisfied, if
my words bore any proportion to my
feelings. Man never spoke language of
more passionate admiration than did I,
he smiled and cried 'Bravo,' as I
finished; then observing that it was
growing dark, he placed his arm within
mine, and led me from the hall.</p>

<p>"We passed through several apartments, lofty, damp, and dark, impressed
with the character of desertion and
decay, but every where carrying the
evidences of former splendour.</p>

<p>"We entered a chamber hung with
dusky tapestry. The end at which we
stood on entering was occupied by a
table and some antique chairs, and upon
the floor, corresponding with the angles
of the table, but at the distance of
some six feet, were placed four massive
golden candlesticks containing huge
wax tapers, which shot into the air to
the height of twelve feet, and burned
with a flame larger than that of a torch,
but white and clear as the light of the
sun. The strange effect of these arrangements was much enhanced by
another still more extraordinary peculiarity which marked this chamber as
unlike any which I had ever seen before. The end of the room at which
we stood, as I have already said, was
occupied by the table and other furniture which I have mentioned, but the
opposite extremity of the chamber I
could not see. It was effectually
shrouded from my sight by a light
semi-transparent vapour, which rolled
and eddied in cloudy volumes within
some twenty or thirty feet of the table—beyond this distance it did not come—some invisible influence held it back,
and there it hung, forming a strange,
heaving barrier, a mysterious impenetrable veil between human vision and
sights, perhaps, unsuited to its ken.
These odd peculiarities of the room in
which I found myself were not without
their effect upon my imagination and
spirits—a sense of unknown danger
overshadowed me. I recounted in my
own mind the circumstances of my
meeting with my host; every thing
which had happened since appeared to
me to furnish matter of indefinite and
horrible suspicion; yet when I looked
upon the mild features of the venerable old man, and read in the play of
his cheerful eye the returning anima
tion of that gay spirit which had so
won upon me at first, I felt my doubts
rebuked, and my superstitious fears
absolutely ridiculous. Still, however,
a gloom was upon me, and it required
a perpetual effort to prevent the unpleasant impressions which I could not
dispel from deepening into awe and
terror.</p>

<p>"The old man motioned to me to
sit down in one of the great antique
chairs by the table, which was covered
with golden plates, and dishes, and cups.
You will readily believe me when I
tell you that I had no desire to eat.
I took advantage then of my host's
abstemiousness to avoid partaking of
his viands, and this was the first and
the last supper at which I ever sate
where not one dish was invaded or even
uncovered.</p>

<p>"'Well,' said my entertainer, 'as
you will not eat, you needs must drink:
if you will imitate my vices, copy at
least my solitary virtue.' So saying
he drew towards himself one of the
cups which stood upon the table, and
shoved another to me. 'Old men
have a right to be selfish,' said he,
'and, therefore, wishing myself many
repetitions of this evening, and that
out of this casual rencounter may
arise a lasting union between us, young
man, with all my soul I pledge you.'
Long and deep was the draught with
which the old man drained to its last
drop the golden goblet; as he raised
the cup to his lips I raised mine to do
him honour, and as I did so I thought
I heard some one mutter over my
shoulder—'That is not wine.'</p>

<p>"I glanced round but there was no
one from whom the sounds could have
proceeded. I raised the cup once
more, the crimson liquid foamed up
towards my lips, a slight sensation of
giddy sickness passed over me as I
lifted the vessel, and the same voice,
real or imagined, whispered sharply in
my ear the startling words—'But the
<em>blood</em>, which is the life of it, thou shalt
not eat.' Horrified I dropped the cup
upon the floor, and whatever was the
liquor which it contained, it was every
drop shed upon the ground. The old
man when this happened was still engaged in his deep potation, and did not
perceive the accident, or if he did,
he certainly did not pretend to do
so. He wiped his mouth and rose
from the table; he motioned me to
be still, and kneeling upon the ground
with his face toward the hidden
part of the chamber, he continued
apparently in long and earnest devotion, stretching his hands forth with
many gestures of vehement entreaty.
As he did so, the surface of the cloudy
barrier became agitated, strange lights
and shadows flitted over it; sometimes
tracing in the eddying vapours wild
ghastly features, which vanished almost
as soon as they appeared, and sometimes dimly showing monstrous shapes,
and now and then more faintly-traced
forms of surpassing grace—all gliding
and wheeling, appearing and melting
away, separating and mingling like
the endless shiftings of a wondrous
dream. At length there came a low
and marvellously sweet sound of far-off
music, like holy choirs singing a wild
requiem over the dead; the sound
stole floating along, sometimes broken
and disordered, as though the untutored
wind swept at random through the
chords of a thousand-stringed instrument, then again, coming with perfect
harmony and unspeakable melody over
the senses, until once more the music
would lose itself in the wild burst of
the wailing wind. Still, however,
minute after minute these fitful wanderings of the melody grew less and
less, and the music breathed on, louder
and more clear, in sweet but unearthly
order. As these wondrous sounds rose
on the ear, I beheld in the cloudy curtain, at first so dimly traced that my
eye lost it every moment, but gradually
becoming more fixed and discernible,
the shadowy semblance of a female
form, wrapt in a thin mantle, and as it
seemed of beauty more than human.
This form, at first traced only in the
faintest discernible shadow, grew gradually more and more clearly defined,
until at length the outline became fixed,
and the colours, and lights, and shadows, after some uncertain flittings to
and fro, clearly developed themselves,
and thus little by little, without my
being able to remember at which point
the transition had taken place, I beheld
what had first been no more than the
lightest shadow upon a fleeting vapour
now stand before me in corporeal substance—a model of preternatural loveliness in limb and feature, but pale and
bloodless as the dead. The old man
arose, and stepping sadly and reverently to her, he took the small hand
which hung languidly by her side, and
led her slowly towards the table. The
beautiful form moved lightly over the
floor, but seemingly without more volition or purpose of its own than belongs
to a mere automaton; the lips pale as
marble, the eyes fixed and glittering,
and every muscle of the perfect face
still as death. He led her to a chair,
and placing her in it, he took one of
the large golden goblets, like that
which he himself had just emptied, full
of the dark red liquid, and putting its
brim to her lips he poured every drop
of its contents down her throat; he
laid the vesssel again in its place, and
withdrawing to a little distance, he
folded his arms, bowed his head downwards like one in deep dejection, and
silently awaited the result. After two
or three wild thrilling peals, the music
gave place to utter silence, and at the
same moment the glow of life spread
itself gently over the face and limbs of
the girl, and dyed her lips with the
brightest crimson, the fixed glance of
her eyes gave place to the soft fire of
animation, and I beheld before me the
breathing archetype of the portrait
whose beauty had so enchanted me.
I approached her—I spoke with her,
her voice was melody such as fills the
ear with ever-varying sweetness, and
floods the heart with mysterious joy;
an embodied dream of divine beauty—unspeakable grace in every the slightest
movement, and absolute fascination in
every look; the very mystery of her
being but heightened the wild interest
which wrapt every faculty of my soul:
delighted wonder, love and awe, fear
and rapture, filled all my heart with a
sweet and terrible delirium of worship.
I saw revealed before me a divinity,
clothed in the eternal majesty of ideal
beauty—that glorious mystery after
which the heart of man has panted and
toiled, and yearned, even since the
world was young. I know not how
the time went by, many hours seemed
but as the dream of a minute; the
spell was broken by the old man her
father, who taking me by the hand led
me away through the dark part of the
chamber; the chill and darkness of the
cold cloudy medium through which we
walked fell like death upon my heart—a revulsion of horror unutterable succeeded; sickness of heart and terror
were upon me. The fearful transition
was, however, of short duration; an
unseen arm thrust me forward, and
when I recovered my equilibrium I
found myself in the aisle of a church,
crowded with listeners, and lighted
with many lamps. A preacher, too,
was loudly haranguing them from
the pulpit. How I had entered the
place I knew not; I stood in the centre of the church; my movements,
however, had undoubtedly been somewhat abrupt.</p>

<p>"'Sir,' exclaimed a bull-necked, red-faced burgher, with an indignant
scowl, 'if you must make a row, you
had better do it at the other side of the
door. We came here to listen, not to
be kicked and jostled.'</p>

<p>"'What the devil ails the young
gentleman?' cried another; 'he bolts
and butts like a mad bull.'</p>

<p>"'You have broken my hat,' ejaculated a third.</p>

<p>“'And my back,' groaned a fourth.</p>

<p>"These and such like exclamations,
accompanied with abundance of sour
looks, were quite sufficient to assure me
that my impetuous entrance at least
was not an illusion. The church was
that of ⸻ one which I had often
visited, and with all whose usual approaches I was thoroughly acquainted.
I was therefore but the more puzzled
and confounded in attempting to account to myself for my suddenly assumed
position in the very centre of the congregation. This was, however, the
least marvel in a day of wonders.</p>

<p>"Henceforward life had lost for me
all interest. I had beheld loveliness
which was not of this earth, beside the
remembrance of which all that I had
ever seen of beauty, either in nature or
in art, seemed gross, insipid, and
charmless. The comeliness of this
world was no more for me; day and
night the same thought haunted me—day and night one dream, from which
it was agony to awaken, overspread my
soul. I was unsocial, changed, spiritstricken, night and morning, moving
and living in the irresistible fascination of the same absorbing, yearning
vision. Day after day, ay, and night
after night, I traced the streets and
lanes of the city in the hope of finding
again the scene of my strange adventures—my searches were all in vain.
I described the street, all its peculiarities, but no one could direct me to it,
none had seen it. Still I wandered
through the city with the almost hopeless object of meeting the old man-this
hope was equally abortive—disappointment, still disappointment. I was
miserable—my life was mere weariness.
I wandered on, a stranger to the pleasures and to the interests of men ; none
knew of the unearthly passion which
wasted me; I neither had nor wished
to have a companion; mysteries had
revealed themselves to me—mysteries
which men could not behold and be
happy. Hour after hour, day after
day, week after week, wore on in one
long, all-absorbing, unsatisfied wish. I
knew that the beautiful being, the
worship of whom was wearing me away,
could not be of this world; but fear I
had none respecting her; there was
indeed awe, but no fear, no revulsion.</p>

<p>"I seldom slept, but when I did, my
slumbers were broken by a thousand
fantastic dreams, but all more or less
horrible. In these visions the foreground was ever occupied by the beautiful subject of my waking thoughts ;
but darkly lurking in some obscure
corner, or suddenly crossing my sight
when I least remembered him, came
the abhorred monk, scaring away the
lovely illusion, and startling me into
broad wakefulness again. After such
dreams, troubled and checkered with
terror though they were, the strange
passion, which had now become the
essence of my being, would return upon
me with redoubled vehemence; existence had become to me one fevered,
unsatisfied wish—a burthen too heavy
for me to bear. One morning 1
started from one of those visions which
continually broke my rest; as I opened
my eyes, I distinctly saw some dark
shapeless thing glide like a snake from
my pillow down the side of the bed,
where I lost sight of it. Hardly knowing why, I sprang upon the floor, and
to my unutterable horror I beheld
peering from under the bed, the face
of the demon monk. With a yell of
despairing terror I howled; 'In God's
name avaunt;' and clasping my hands
over my eyes I stood fixed and freezing
in an agony of horror, not daring to
expose myself to the terrors of a second
gaze.
I stood locked in this tremendous catalepsy, until my servant entering the chamber more than an hour
after, recalled me to myself.</p>

<p>"'I see it, I see it all,' thought I,
as with the excitement of madness I
paced up and down my chamber—'I
know it, I am under the influence of
Satan—in the power of the tormentor.
Oh, God! oh, God! is there no passage
of escape? is there no refuge from this
Satanic persecution? Must I waste
away in strength of body and in the
faculties of my mind, until body and
soul perish for ever?'</p>

<p>"Almost as I uttered this agonized
appeal, a thought struck me as suddenly
as if it had been suggested by another
speaker—'Go present yourself to a
priest; confess your sins in a penitent
spirit, and he will give you good counsel in your present strait, and if on
earth there be deliverance for you,
it is thus.' The thought had hardly
presented itself, when I put it into execution. I went to an aged and holy
man and made my shrift, and on the
imposition of a certain penance, he
gave me absolution. I told him all I
had suffered, and asked his advice under
the peculiar and horrible case. Having
heard me attentively, the good old
man told me to be of good cheer.</p>

<p>"'My son,' said he, 'thou hast experienced one of those assaults of the
evil one which we, who sit in the confessional, are often told of—ay, while
the giddy unconscious world is scouting the very possibility of such things.
Strangely, too, it is, that as in thy case,
my child, it generally happens that
those who come hither for counsel
under such terrors as those which
have so long haunted thee, are from
among the gay fashionable votaries of
pleasure, whose chief characteristic it
is to lead the way in ridiculing all belief in such influences, and too often
in covert derision of religion itself.
Watch and pray, my son—by no consent of thine own invite the adversary;
purify thy conscience by frequent confession; trust in the mercy of heaven;
walk in the ways of life uprightly and
humbly; mortify every foolish as well
as every sinful desire; and if thou dost
so, Satan will never possess thee, body
or soul, in all time, hereafter for
ever.'</p>

<p>"I returned much comforted and
with singleness of heart; I endeavoured
in all things to conform myself to the
directions of the good priest, and thus
day by day the delirium under which
my rest, and strength, and faculties
were declining, gradually melted away
and almost disappeared.</p>

<p>"A month had passed away, and I
had become in health and spirits like
other men, my mind being now
thoroughly released from its former
wanderings. I entered at nightfall the
church of ⸻. I knew not what
feeling impelled me in the choice.
There were but few worshippers in
the church, and my thoughts, no doubt
misled by the associations with which
my last visit to this place was connected, wandered far away from the
subject on which you will say they
ought to have been fixed. My attention was, however, recalled to the scene
before me by a circumstance which I
shall not soon forget. Two figures
caught my eye, as it seemed to me, that
of a male and of a female, but both
wrapt in mantles so ample as effectually
to conceal the limbs, and quite to over-shadow the features of those who wore
them; both had drawn the hoods of
their cloaks over their heads. The
instant my eye encountered these
figures, a sudden conviction flashed
upon my mind that they were those of
the very objects of the search which
had for so long absorbed me. Every
moment served to confirm this conviction; and when I saw them rise and
pass from the church it was with a fearful interest that I too arose and followed them. They passed into the
street, now nearly dark, I still closely
dogging their steps: when they had
arrived there, after a short pause they
separated, moving rapidly in opposite
directions; without hesitation I followed the lighter of the two figures,
inwardly convinced that it was in truth
no other than that of the being whom
most of all I should have shunned and
dreaded. Through many streets I
followed the light gliding form, with a
fascination too deep for words; with
a blind obedience still I followed it,
until it passed beyond the precincts of
the city, and as the figure entered the
broad fields, now sleeping under the
misty light of the moon, I suffered
the distance which separated us to increase, so far as to avoid the immediate
likelihood of detection to which a near
pursuit, though unremarked among
the throng of the city streets, would,
in this sequestered and open place,
have exposed me. Cautiously and at
some distance then I followed, until I
saw the object of my curiosity pause
under. the boughs of some tall trees,
and, throwing back the hood from her
face, and suffering the cloak to fall
upon the ground, seat herself gently
upon a large grey stone which stood
there, and crossing her arms pensively
on her lap, gaze fixedly upward at the
broad bright disc of the beautiful
moon.</p>

<p>"I resolved now to ascertain the
correctness of my suspicions; and resisting as well as I might the misgivings and fears which crossed my mind,
I stole noiselessly along under the
broad friendly shade of the majestic
trees, beneath which she was seated.
Under cover of some brushwood I
crept noiselessly onward, until I had
reached to within some ten or twelve
steps of the mysterious figure. The
countenance was raised a little; the
dark silken hair, parted on the forehead, fell in luxuriant folds upon the
white shoulders and heaving bosom of
the beautiful being. I beheld the full
lustrous eye beneath its long dark
lashes, and the exquisite features all
revealed in the pale light of the moon,
and clothed in the witching tenderness of
sadness. A single glance told me that
I was not mistaken; the conviction
smote upon my heart; for an instant its
pulses were suspended, and a chill,
like that of death, shot through my
frame, and then through every artery
the tingling life-blood sprang with a
recoil as impetuous and sudden. It
was she—the dreamed-of—the longed-for—the enchantress. I abandoned
myself to the intoxication of the moment. With words of passionate madness I threw myself at her feet: she
raised me up—her arms were around
me.</p>

<hr/>

<p>"Beautiful betrayer—passionately-beloved phantom—unearthly lover!—what have I done? I am a fear and
wonder to myself. Are all thy tears
and blushes a mockery, and can hell
borrow the beauty and modesty of angels? Sweet terrible illusion, I will
not curse thee: 'twas I—<em>I</em> and not
thou who wooed these strange horrors—thou didst warn me—ay! fallen,
lost for ever as thou wert, warn me
in pity—with tears, and supplications,
and shadowy threatenings implore and
resist. Still night after night thy
footsteps are my guide, thy smiles
my life, thy bosom my pillow the
vital taper burns away—down, down,
wasting in the fierce glare of fever.
Where, where will end this agony
of love and despair? Would to God
that heart and brain were dust, so I
might remember no more, and be at
rest! But no, no, it may not be. Cruel,
beautiful destroyer! thou wilt drink my
life away sweetly, slowly, ever day by
day. I am all thine own—heavier,
heavier grows the dreary sleep. All
men move around me strangers, and
as far away from my world of existence as from the dimmest star that
twinkles in the sky. I have but one
companion, one interest, one object;
ever within me dread and loathing
wrestle against passionate love in
eternal agony. Oh! God! whence
art thou, beautiful destroyer? Thou
wouldst not kill me for ever. There
is pity—infinite pity—in thy words
and looks—tenderness and sorrow ever
in thy dark, soft, deadly eyes: thy
sweet words, too, ever warning—ay!
thou hast truly said. The grieved
and vainly-resisting slave of others art
thou—the unwilling thrall of agencies
hated and feared, but from which never—never in time or eternity canst
thou escape.</p>

<hr/>

<p>"One evening, in the self same
church, I saw the other figure stand
with her again; I followed them forth,
but vainly looked for her to separate
from him when they had reached
the street. Together the two figures
walked quickly onward, I following.
Twice or thrice she turned her head,
and with hasty gestures stealthily
warned me off. Still doggedly I pur.
sued: they walked, I know not whither,
through streets strange to me; and
at length, like a dream, around me
rose the objects which my memory
had so carefully treasured—the dark,
silent street whither the old man had
led me months before—the long grass
waving in the night breeze over the
pavement—the dim, tall, mouldering
palaces at both sides towering darkly
against the deep blue sky of midnight,
and all over-shone by the pale moon.
The two shapes stopped by the self-same stone porch which had given me
entrance to the habitation so terribly
remembered. Like one in a dream,
without fear or purpose, I stepped
lightly to the gate before they entered. The old man (it was he)
moved to meet me—bade me welcome a thousand times, and made me
promise to come in with him. This
I did eagerly, though I saw the girl
who stood behind him wring her hands
as if in sorrow. Glaring lights of
many colours were streaming from
the windows, and mirthful music,
mixed with wild uproar like the mad
gusts of a tempest, resounded from
the distant chambers. Shadows too
flitted and bounded across the casements. We entered the hall as before, the old man leading the way.
As we moved around the girl whispered softly in my ear—'You are
in mortal peril. For your soul's sake
eat nothing—drink nothing; speak
to no being whom you do not know,
and say to me no word of love, or
you perish everlastingly. They will
have you. <em>HeM/em> (pointing to the old
man) and a worse than he will torment you for ever. Guard every
look and word; trust not in your own
strength, but elsewhere; be not terrified by their mockeries, and when
you can escape hence fly.'</p>

<p>"Still with a dull recklessness I followed the old man, and mounted with
him a broad marble staircase. As we
ascended, the sounds became louder
and fiercer. Loud barbaric music,
mingled with fierce bursts of maniac
laughter—Bacchanalian shouts, and
long-drawn yells, as it seemed of
agony, along with the continuous shuffling and pounding of feet upon the
floors, produced a combination of
noises which few could have heard
without terror. I paused for a moment at the door, and then, summoning
my utmost resolution, I entered.
The spectacle before me was one which,
while consciousness remains, I can never forget. A vast chamber, lighted
dazzlingly with a thousand lamps, or
rather stars, for they were not supported nor suspended by any thing,
but glowed, flickered, and sported, separate and self-sustained, rolling and
eddying high in air—expanding, and
contracting, and yielding in glorious
succession all the most splendid colours which imagination can conceive.
Beneath this gorgeous and ever-shifting illumination a vast throng of shapes
were moving—all enacting, but with
a repulsive and hideous exaggeration,
the courteous observances and jollity
of a festive meeting. Some glided to
and fro with courtly ease, but bearing
upon their lifeless faces the fearful
stamp of sin and eternal anguish ;
others sate looking on, their fixed
features writhed into smiles which,
but to dream of, would appal the fancy
for days; others, with ghastly idiotic
grimaces, made hideous music from
strange instruments, which panted and
quivered, and writhed like living things
in agony; others leaped, and danced,
and howled, and glared like the very
fiends of madness; and all formed a
crowd of such terrific and ghastly
horror as words cannot even faintly
shadow forth. I felt like one under
the enchantment of opium: I feared
nothing: I revelled in the horrors
among which I was plunged: an intoxication too strong for body and
mind was upon me. Among these
appalling and tremendous sights I beheld close by me, with fierce rapture,
the beautiful form of the mysterious
being who had won my very soul. I
spoke I know not what words of passion, and she, with grief and horror
in her face, said softly to me—</p>

<p>"'Speak to me no more of love,
as you would save your soul alive.
In sin and sorrow my lot is fixed for
ever. Beware how you court me here.
I strive to save you. We are not all
alike. I am not as these: I have
mercy I would deliver you: but
these are stronger than I. The adversary has called me from my mournful dreams to work his will. They
will have you—they will have you.
Know you who they are?'</p>

<p>"I spoke again, I know not what.
'Beware-once more beware,' said
she softly. 'See you not that these
are in torment and hatred? You
know what they are. If you regard
not my counsel you will be among
them, and of them in eternity. You
are in mortal peril—beware.'</p>

<p>"Again, in wayward madness, I
spoke—</p>

<p>"'The time draws nigh,' said she,
while death-paleness overspread her
cheeks. 'I foresaw this. I dreaded
it. The time draws nigh—my mission will be ended. They will let me
go to my quiet; but you they will
possess and keep in the bondage of
hell—in hatred and agony for ever
and ever. It is too late now. You
have spoken the word. I am going
hence, where you will see me no more.'</p>

<p>"As she thus spoke, a cloudy indistinctness overspread the pale beautiful
vision, and she began slowly and mournfully to recede from me. Stung with
horror and agony at the sight, I cast
myself before the fading form.</p>

<p>"'Stay, stay, beautiful, beloved illusion,' I said; 'leave me not, oh, leave
me not alone—I can love none other—I
am your slave, your worshipper—I am
yours for ever—God be my witness.'</p>

<p>"As I ended the sentence, a yelling
crash like the roar of ten thousand
gigantic bells stunned my ears—total
darkness swallowed every object, and
my senses forsook me.</p>

<p><tr/></p>

<p>"I was found in the morning by the
sexton of ⸻, senseless, bruised, and
covered with blood and foam, lying in
the great aisles of that building. Since
then I have been, <em>you</em> will say, mad—<em>I</em> say, the sport of other souls than my
own—a blind, desperate instrument of
hell, wending onward to an eternal
doom which no imaginable power can
avert. This consciousness of inevitable fate has been my companion ever
since then, and it has taught me to despise opinion, virtue, vice—to trample
on religion, and to laugh at punishment.</p>

<p>"Satan, whose I am, had chosen me
for himself, to do his work even from
the first. I am one with him, and he
with me; and when I die, will merge for
ever into that dark mind. Think you,
then, I care whether death come to-day,
or to-morrow, or the next day? It must
arrive soon; and then—</p>

<p>"Now, father, I have confessed
enough, and you are welcome to tell
my shrift to all the world. Absolve
me now; and if you send me to heaven,
I'll give you credit for a wonder-worker when we meet."</p>

<p>So saying, he laughed loud and bitterly.</p>

<hr/>

<p>He is to die to-morrow in the Place
of St. Mark. They are building the
scaffold. All are anxious to see the
celebrated bravo and bandit.</p>

<p>They say that he has killed more
than two hundred men in various
broils and actions with his own hand.
The caitiff mob of Venice admires the
gigantic ruffian.</p>

<p>"Spalatro," say they, "was a great
man—a grand robber—a tremendous
bravo. There will not soon again be
such another dagger in Venice."</p>

<hr/>

<p>It is over—the axe has fallen—the
wretched sinner has passed from the
world he so much abused. He spoke
to the people from the scaffold, but all
in mockery and jibes. The giddy
crowd applauded him. When he had
done speaking, and before the executioner was ready, of a sudden, and for
the last time, a fit seized him; he cried
out with a loud voice. The devil cast
him down, and tore him. While he
lay struggling on the planks the signal
was made, and at two blows the head
was severed from the body.</p>

<hr/>

<p>Thus ends the narrative of honest
Giacamo. Whether or not he believed
the tale I cannot tell he certainly
wrote it carefully out from end to end
in his fair tall hand. For myself, I
have little doubt that the story contains a pretty accurate detail of the
successive attacks of <em>delirium tremens</em>
which the drunken excesses of the
wretch Spalatro were calculated to induce; for it is but giving the devil his due
to admit, that it is not his usual practice
to have young men to supper with a view
to get off his daughters. I confess, too,
that, under all the circumstances, I
am strongly inclined to think that "the
<em>old man</em> who figures in the foregoing narrative, (and whom I take to
be identical with the old boy,) ought to
have consummated his persecution of
the poor highwayman by an action for
breach of promise of marriage, which
would certainly lie in such a case.
Perhaps, however, the devil showed his
good sense in preferring his own fireside to venturing into our courts of law
for a remedy. However, my dear
Harry, joke as we may, it is not easy,
no nor possible, altogether to extract
from the mind its inborn affection for
the marvellous. Philosophy does but
teach us the extent of our ignorance
(I think I saw that somewhere or other
before, but no matter). Do the dead
return from the grave? Do strange influences reveal to mortal eye the shadowy vistas of, futurity? Can demoniac agencies possess the body as of
old, and blast the mind? What are
these things that we call spectral illusions, dreams, madness? All around
us is darkness and uncertainty. To
what thing shall we say I understand
thee? All is doubt—all is mystery;
in short, in the words of our poetic
countrymen—"It's all botheration
from bottom to top."</p>

<p><span>Yours faithfully, though far away,</span></p>

<p><span>THE TRANSLATOR.</span></p>
			</section>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
